*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREEN GIRL ***
        




                            The Green Girl

                    (A Serial in Two Parts) Part I

                          By Jack Williamson

                         Illustrated by WESSO

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Amazing Stories March and April 1930.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


_In a very recent issue of_ SCIENCE AND INVENTION _Dr. Hartman
tells of the amazing discoveries he has made in the Mediterranean,
off the coast of Sicily, when he went below the sea in his newly
constructed steel diving bell, which was designed to withstand a
pressure of 2,500 pounds per square inch or a sub-sea depth of about
5,000 feet. During his latest venture below the sea level, Dr. Hartman
discovered a prehistoric city--perhaps the Lost Atlantis. Why, then,
should it be impossible to assume that there might be cities--even
vast cities--submerged miles below the Pacific, for instance, and
made habitable? But whatever else might be said, "The Green Girl" is
a scientifiction classic that will rank with the best that have ever
been published. Though it is a wild, exciting, fantastic tale, it is
exceedingly plausible withal. Be sure to read the first instalment in
this issue._




                               CHAPTER I

                              MAY 4, 1999


_At high noon on May 4, 1999, the sun went out!_ It had risen bright
and clear. The summer sky had had an unwonted liquid brilliance. The
climbing day-star had shone all the morning with unusual intensity.
But just at ten o'clock, an intangible mist obscured the sky! A pale
and deepening film stole over the crystal infinity of the heavens! The
sky assumed a dull, almost copper tinge, that developed into a ghastly
scarlet pall! In five minutes the sky changed from a soft and limpid
blue to an intense, darkling scarlet! In the appalling suggestion of
blood in the dusky crimson depths, there was a grim omen of the fate of
earth!

I had got up at dawn for a plunge in the surf, and all the morning
I had been wandering about the bit of beach and the strip of virgin
woodland behind it, content in the restful, soothing peace of that
untouched bit of Nature, rejoicing lazily in the vivid greenness of it,
in the fresh odors of earth and plant, in the whisper of the wind in
the palms. I lounged on the crisp grass in the cooling shade, living
in my sympathy with the life about me, watching the long soft rollers
of the green-blue Atlantic surging deliberately toward the crystal
whiteness of the sunlit sandy beach. The soft cerulean skies were
clear, save for the white wings of occasional airships that glanced in
the bright sunshine. The morning had a singularly quiet and soothing
beauty. My sleepy soul was in harmony with the distant mellow chime of
a church bell. I lay back in the peaceful rest of a man ready to sink
lazily into the evening of life.

Though I am still an able man of somewhat less than thirty years, I
felt that morning none of the energetic exuberance of youth. I felt
something of the age and the agelessness of Nature herself. I felt no
fires of ambition; I was oddly devoid of feeling or emotion; I felt
content to steep my soul for eternities in Nature's simple wonders. But
I have always been a dreamer.

I was a worshipper come unknowingly for the last time to the shrine
of life. For even then the doom was gathering! But I was spared all
knowledge of the alien menace that was blotting out the sun! I had
no premonition that within a few short hours the balmy Florida coast
would be a frozen wilderness, whipped with bitter winds and lashed with
freezing seas!

I had risen at last, and was sauntering down the hard white sand in
the direction of our cottage, listening idly to the birds--singing on
the eve of their doom. I came in sight of the house, a low building,
covered with climbing vines and half hidden in the trees. I strolled
toward it upon the narrow, curving gravel walk, lost in the peace of
the rustic setting.

The Doctor was sitting on the small veranda, gazing sleepily out over
the sea, with his pipe in his mouth and his hands on the arms of his
chair. Dr. Samuel Walden was the sole person in the world, outside
the vivid creations of my dreams, for whom I had affection. He was
an unusual character. Born in 1929, he was now seventy years of age.
His earlier life had been devoted to science, and he had won fame
and fortune for himself by the invention of the hydrodyne sub-atomic
engine. But in the last twenty years he had done no scientific
work--or so I thought, for I had never been behind the little door that
he kept always locked.

A close friend of my parents, he had been more than a father to me
since they were lost in the turmoil of the last outbreak against the
Council of Nations, when I was three years old. We had always lived in
the old cottage on the hill, in this natural park on the Florida coast.
He loved Nature deeply. For many years his chief interests in life had
been plants and animals, for which he cared more than for society. A
flower, a dog, the sound of the surf--such things were the joys of his
life.

Though his hair had been white for many years, his lean, tanned face
was unwrinkled, and he was among the strongest men of my acquaintance.
In fact, two years before, he had won second place at the Olympic
wrestling contests. He loved the simple things of life. He had a
passion for cooking, and he made it a science as well as an art. He was
an inveterate smoker, and clung to the habit, even when he had to have
the tobacco smuggled in from Asia at vast expense. He had an old music
box, of a type that went out of date half a century ago, to which he
used to listen for hours on end.

There was little enough about Sam Walden's daily life to show that he
was the greatest scientist of the earth, and the sole hope for the
world in the amazing battle that was brewing. His simple philosophy had
changed him far from the energetic young inventor of the hydrodyne.
No one would have suspected the qualities of supreme heroism that he
revealed.

During the days of my youth we had restlessly wandered over the globe.
We had lived rather aimlessly--for the simple joy of living. The
mountains, the desert, and the sea have always had a fascinating call
for both of us, and we wandered in answer to that call--and during some
of those years, I traveled on a strange quest of my own.

But it was a whole decade since we had left our rustic home. And as our
latter years had been quiet and tranquil, so the world had lost the
fierce energy and struggle for advancement, that had driven it during
Sam's younger days. It had settled down to the enjoyment of peaceful
content. Science had turned from the invention of new machines to the
improvement of those in existence, and had died with their perfection,
until, when the crisis came, Sam was the only man on earth able to
understand and to cope with it!

The industrial organization had been perfected. Work was done by
machines. Men attended them for short hours and played through long
ones. There were no rich, and no poor. The products of industry were
fairly divided. All men received their shares in content and enjoyed
them to the full, without troubling themselves about the question of
science or religion or of life that had received the attention of the
past generation.

And upon the peaceful tranquillity of that happy, prosperous age,
there fell with no warning the lurid doom that no man could explain,
throwing it into frenzied confusion. In the past era, there would have
been a thousand men to attack the problem, with all the power of clear,
dynamic minds. Now, there was just _one man_ who could understand!

It was not so much that scientific knowledge was lacking. Men still
studied and talked the language of science. The machines demanded
it. But there were none of trained and penetrating minds, used to
departing boldly from the world of the known to bring forth the new.
Science was no longer living. It was mechanical.




                              CHAPTER II

                            The Radio Girl


I have said that I am a dreamer, living more truly in my fancy than
in the world. Perhaps my imagination is abnormally developed. Always
I have had new worlds awaiting me in my dreams, to which I could
retire when life was dull or unattractive. My visions have always had
a singular reality, such a definite concreteness, that it sometimes
seemed to be the truth.

The old wonder stories of Wells and Verne, and of the pseudo-scientific
writers of the first part of this century have always appealed to me. I
had a vast collection of ancient volumes and tattered magazines, full
of those old stories, which I read and reread with passionate interest.
The rest of the world had forgotten them with the passing of the age of
science, but I found in them the priceless food of fancy.

Psychologists say that many children have dream companions of some
kind. They are very real entities of the child's imagination, playmates
of fancy. They usually fade and are forgotten as the adolescent child
becomes absorbed in the activities of life, and the imagination
atrophies.

Since the days of my earliest recollections, I have visited in the
world of my dreams a wonderful playmate. It is a girl, with dark brown
hair, deep, warm violet eyes, and clear skin, so I thought, slightly
tinged with green, though the lips were very red. I have always thought
that she was very beautiful, and she has always been very real to me.

And the vision did not fade as the years went by! Still I visited the
Green Girl, as I called her, in my fancy, and she replaced many of the
normal childhood interests that I might have had. It is because of her
that I have always been happiest when I was silent and alone, it is
because of my dreams that I have been inclined to avoid the society of
others.

The strange world of dreams in which I visited her was very real to
me, a place of weird wonders, sometimes of alien terrors, in which the
Green Girl and I wandered through interminable, astounding adventures.
And I have always had an unaccountable persuasion that it was a real
world, somewhere, through which my mind roamed in such delightful
fancies!

It was twenty years ago, when I was just five years old, that the Green
Girl first came into my dreams. Sam had rigged up, for my edification,
an old fashioned radio set, with headphones. In the long, lonely
silences of the warm Florida nights, when a less indulgent guardian
would have had me in bed, I sat up with those old phones on my ears,
exploring the ether, feeling near the infinite mystery of space. I
listened with childish intentness to the odd noises of the static,
eagerly dreaming of calls from other planets.

It was during one of those long still nights that I first entered that
world of fancy, and found--the Green Girl! It seemed that I heard first
a cry of delight in a silver voice, and then she was with me. She was
but a tiny sprite, smaller than myself. She seemed to stand before
me, smiling at me, tossing her dark curls, with the light of bright
intelligence in her blue-violet eyes. I loved her from the first. She
was very beautiful. Her skin had just a tinge of green, like a tinted
photograph; it did not seem a strange color. The vision was very real
to me.

When she spoke--and I half imagined her words were really coming over
the ether--there was a childish lisp in her voice, but still a ring
of confidence and courage. Her words were strange, but I soon grew to
sense their meaning, almost by intuition. Night after night, when I put
on the phones and tuned in on the strange noises of the ether, that
vision came back. It was not long before I could speak that strange
tongue as fluently as I could speak English.

With childish reserve, I told Sam nothing about my wonderful dream,
until one day he heard me chattering in the language I had learned.
He questioned me eagerly; and I shyly told him all about it, and
even supplied material for a grammar of the language. He took a keen
scientific interest in the matter, when he learned that the vision came
only over the radio, and he began to formulate theories of telepathic
suggestion and mind control by ether waves.

The matter was written up by a prominent psychologist to whom he
reported it. The account appeared in a well known scientific magazine,
with comments upon the strange language, which, oddly enough, bore not
the slightest similarity to any known tongue, and appeared rather too
perfect to be credited to the invention of a five-year-old. The writer
mentioned Sam's ideas, that I had established telepathic contact with
another planet, or perhaps with the far-distant past or future; but
theories of mind reading received little welcome in a day when science
was dormant, and even the suggestion that the language, because of its
simplicity, power, and labial beauty, would become the long-sought
international tongue, was soon completely forgotten.

But I did not forget the Green Girl. The conviction grew upon me that
she was a real living entity. To find her became my ruling passion.
Under Sam's tutelage I poured over geographical accounts, searching in
vain for some clue to a hidden nation. But the fact that the language
seemed to have no sister tongue on earth discouraged that. Between my
tenth and fifteenth years Sam and I restlessly scoured the globe in
search of a clue, but a decade before we had given it up.

I turned to dreams of interplanetary travel with a passionate desire
to explore space and venture to other worlds in search of my dream
girl; but the space flier seemed as far in the future as it had done
a hundred years before. To please me, however, Sam helped design and
construct a model of a machine we called the Omnimobile--because it
should be able to travel in all elements.

But, as the years of my early manhood passed, I slowly relinquished all
hope of finding the Green Girl in fact, and resolved to content myself
with her companionship in fancy. It was then, too, that I developed my
inordinate fondness for scientific romances which I devoured insatiably
to feed my dreams. It was only during the first few years that I
could find her only over the radio. As time went by, she became an
inseparable companion of my mind.

Once, for a time, I tried to lose myself in science. I had Sam teach me
chemistry, but that could not replace my dreams.

Together, the Green Girl and I went through ten thousand fantastic
adventures. It was as if our two minds met in the world of dreams
jointly created by both of us. Certainly it was influenced by the
incidents of my life, and by the wonder tales I read. And the girl told
me stories, strange and thrilling narratives they were, of mythical
heroes of her race that struggled with weird terrors.

She grew up with myself, until she became a princess of incomparable
beauty. Often I have wished that I were a gifted painter, that I might
have tried to record her charms, but even if I had been such, her
perfection would have discouraged my efforts. She was slender, erect,
combining an unconscious dignity of poise with vivacious spriteliness
of manner. Her hair was soft and curly and brown. Her pale green skin
was very soft; her full lips very red. And her sparkling violet eyes
were clear and honest--bright wells of human sympathy.

Could I believe that such a supernal being was merely a dream?




                              CHAPTER III

                           The Scarlet Pall


The coming of the terror was slow and gradual enough--and as silent as
the tomb! With all the magic of the quiet woodland beauty throbbing in
my being, I was strolling up the narrow gravel walk toward the peaceful
vine-covered cottage, where Sam was sitting in sleepy content. Gazing
idly into the measureless infinity of the liquid azure sky, I saw the
beginning come, so slowly that I scarcely marked it!

A pale rosy mist seemed suddenly to condense in the sky! A ubiquitous
crimson haze was born from nowhere! Even as I stood in open-mouthed
amazement--with the sudden chill of alien terror grasping my limbs and
tugging at my heart--the hue of the sky ran quickly from the pure deep
blue to an intense and awful scarlet! It was deeper than the crimson of
sunset--it had a terrible, bloody intensity! It was as if a spray of
blood from the arteries of some dying monster had abruptly encrimsoned
the sky!

A fearful, blood-red twilight fell swiftly upon the tranquil beauty
of the scene before me, painting it with hues of weird and gruesome
horror! The once blue sea rolled in like a tide of blood, flashing a
million gleams of awful crimson light, as the red sun was reflected on
its waves! Familiar objects took on dreadful forms of wild foreboding,
in that suddenly ghastly gloom of red!

And that was but the beginning!

The Unknown is always terrible, and if ever the earth was menaced
with an unfamiliar threat, it was that scarlet pall. For a moment I
was gripped fast by the surprise, and the chilling, alien fear of it.
Then my reason reasserted itself, and I hurried on toward the cottage,
trying to convince myself that my dread was unfounded.

I knew, of course, that red light penetrated clouds much better than
other colors. I knew that the red light of a neon beacon is visible
through miles of mist. I knew that the sun looks red on a murky day,
because all but the red rays are absorbed by the atmosphere. I had an
idea that a cloud had suddenly come between earth and sun, perhaps a
haze of meteoric dust. But I failed to reassure myself.

With a glance at the sun, which was gleaming at the zenith like a great
red moon, I stepped upon the veranda, still feeling a slight weakness
about the knees. Sam had risen to his feet. He stood gazing silently
and blankly out to the eastern horizon, where the flaming intensity
of the encrimsoned sky met the glancing brilliant beams from the
darkened sea. There was no surprise in his expression, and little of
fear--merely pain and despair.

"What is it, Sam?" I asked quickly.

He looked around slowly. "I don't know what it is, Mel, but it means
the end of the earth! I've known for years that it was coming, but I
hoped it wouldn't be so soon."

"You knew that this was coming! And you didn't tell anybody! Not even
me!"

"It would have done no good. What would be the benefit to mankind to
know that it was doomed to die like rats in a trap? A few more years,
and I might have been ready to save the earth. As it is, there's just a
chance--a bare chance!"

"But what does it mean? It's uncanny!"

He sat down again, wearily. There were lines of age and care on his
lean face that I had never seen before. But even in the dull red light,
there was still energy and determination in it.

"I've never told you, Mel, but ever since the radio brought you your
dream of the Green Girl, I have been working--building delicate
apparatus and exploring the ether. And I found a strange force at
work--a force that is battling to control the ether! For fifteen years
I have known that it was working _to freeze the earth_!"

"To freeze the earth!"

"It seems so. What it is is a mystery, whose solution has resisted
all my efforts. I can hardly conceive a reason for it. But I know
that something is at work to cut us off from the sun! You know that
light waves of different phases and the same frequency interfere, with
mutual extinction--the diffraction grating is based on that fact. And
interfering waves have been setting up such a disturbance in the ether
about the earth as will ultimately cut off the sun's radiation! The
principles of it are a bit abstruse. Even now, of course, the effect is
only partially complete. In fact, the red and infra-red rays carry most
of the sun's heat."

"Then there's no immediate danger?"

"No man knows at what moment the force may be synchronized. When it is,
within a short time the temperature of the earth will fall to absolute
zero. And even as it is, life could not go on long under this red
pall, for all life depends upon the actinic rays in the ultra-violet
spectrum."

"And you have kept a thing like this to yourself for years!"

"It would have done the world no good to know that any day might be
its last. I have spared no efforts to find means of averting the
catastrophe. And it has been terrible to know. Every day that I have
walked among our trees, or listened to the birds, or watched the wonder
of the sea, I have known that in a day it might all be frozen death!"

"But you say there is a chance? There's something you can do to save
the earth?"

"I've built a machine to broadcast vibrations to interfere with that
other force. It will upset it--I hope!--for perhaps a few days. But
think, Mel, what it means! Think of the vastness of the power that
would be able to cut off the sun! Earth--mankind--would mean nothing to
it! It would soon get around my interference! I must save my machine
for the last emergency!"




                              CHAPTER IV

                           The Amazing Night


The only difference between red and blue light is that the waves of the
red are about twice as long as the others. There must have been a sort
of screen in the ether that somehow intercepted all but a narrow band
of frequencies in the red, the other wave-lengths being either canceled
or converted into vibrations too long or too short to be perceptible.
If there was such a screen, it was slowly altered, so that the lengths
of the penetrating waves became shorter and shorter.

In other words, the color of the sky slowly ran through all the colors
of the spectrum toward the blue! The sun changed from a vast round
blood-ruby to a blazing yellow diamond, flooding the earth with a
sodium light! To an emerald, huge and supernally bright, coloring the
sea and the sky with a dim and ghastly green radiance! The green melted
into a cold and awful blue! The frozen sapphire slowly turned violet!
And the violet sun grew soft and dim--and dim--until it went out
utterly!

The heavens were black at midday!

The sky was an empty, illimitable chasm of darkness! The night was
almost tangible--it seemed to have an oppressive weight. It was blacker
than any photographer's darkroom. Trees, cottage, sounding sea, had
vanished! It made no difference to close my eyes, or to put my hand
before them. A great dizziness came over me, and I groped blindly for
the post of the veranda, and clung to it helplessly when I found it.

The sounds that came to me were oddly reassuring. The rustle of the
wind in the palms, and the plaintive chirp of a few birds in the unseen
trees, and the dull, ceaseless rumble of the waves. Then I heard a
heavy sigh from Sam, and the scraping of his shoe on the floor. Then
a match scratched, and a pitiful little yellow flame lit the veranda,
showing Sam's lean, earnest face very clearly against the wall of night.

"Thank God we can see it burn!" he muttered. "If they had exhausted the
ether here, the jig would have been up with my electrical machinery."

"They! Lord! Do you think somebody--"

He looked toward me, holding up the blazing splinter. "There is the
possibility--even a probability--that we have to deal with a force
directed by intelligence!"

"Who do you think--"

"I didn't say human intelligence."

"You mean Mars or--"

He grinned in the feeble light. "No. Nothing out of your stories. The
human imagination is limited by human experience. And there are plenty
of things possible that human beings have never experienced!"

"What do you mean, Sam?" I gasped in utter bewilderment.

"I don't know what it is that is attacking the earth. Possibly it is
something so strange, so alien to my purely human experience that it
would wreck my mind to know!" Abruptly he turned toward the door. "I
must go in and get to work on the machine."

The match had burned out, and the utter blackness had fallen again.
I heard the old scientist get briskly to his feet and walk into the
house. He reached the light button, and the hall was flooded with cold
white radiance. The bright, slender beam thrown out across the veranda
comforted me immensely; but I still stood against the post, trying
vainly to think out what Sam had said.

The breeze grew cooler. In ten minutes a thin cold wind sprang up from
the north. I drew my light garments close about my body and shivered a
little. For a while I did not go in. Presently I felt a cold mist on
the wind. Suddenly a snowflake splashed chillingly against my face--an
omen of the frigid doom that lay before the earth! I got up and stepped
inside the door, to escape the icy wind. In a few minutes it began to
rain, because, of course, of the chilling of the air and condensation
of the moisture.

Suddenly curious about how the world was taking the weird catastrophe,
and about what was happening elsewhere, I went to the radiophone in the
living room, and switched it on. Not a sound came from it! Not even a
hint of static! The ether was utterly dead! That meant that the strange
force had already cut our civilization up into a thousand helplessly
isolated units!

Then from the rear of the building I heard the peculiar rhythmic
throbbing beat of a hydrodyne power generator. Sam was already at work
in the little room he had always kept locked, even against me. I walked
back to the door and knocked, asking to be allowed to come in.

Sam called out for me to enter, and I stepped inside. I stopped at
the door in amazement. The little space was crowded with intricate
electrical apparatus of modern design--in fact, much of it was new
and unfamiliar to me. There were intra-atomic power generators, huge
electron tubes, coils, switches, loop antennæ, and a wealth of other
material that was strange to me. I saw at once that the laboratory
before me must have represented vast sums of money and years of toil.

Sam, clad in a pair of greasy overalls, with a great smudge of grease
already over half his lean face, was working intently over a huge
complex device in the center of the room. Evidently it had been
recently and hastily assembled from the materials at hand, and was not
yet quite finished. In fact, a desk by the wall was still littered with
the plans and calculations from which it had been set up.

It was evidently founded on an adaptation of Sam's great invention of
forty years before, the hydrodyne sub-atomic engine. The hydrodyne
is based in principle on the catacytic disruption, by means of a
radioactive salt, of water, the products being hydrogen and oxygen
gases, which are burned in the cylinders, the steam formed being
condensed and pumped back into the coils. The actual energy comes from
the disintegration of hydrogen atoms, and the efficiency of the device
is shown by the fact that the great generators on the transoceanic
aerial liners require only a half pint of water as fuel per trip.

At one end of Sam's new machine was the hydrodyne unit. From the size
of the catalyzer coil, it must have been of vast capacity. The conduits
led to the transformer coils, and above the coils were the giant
electron tubes, six feet high, of a novel, horseshoe shape. Sam was
working with deft fingers at the connections.

"It will be hours, yet," he said absently, without looking up.

For a long time I stood looking at him, as he worked with utter
absorption and feverish haste. There was nothing I could do to help
him--I could hardly understand what he was about. How strange it was to
stand there in a freezing world and watch one lone man struggling to
save it!

[Illustration: _For a long time I stood looking at him, as he worked
with utter absorption and feverish haste.... How strange it was to
stand and watch one lone man in a freezing world struggling to save
it!_]

The cold rain was drumming heavily on the roof, and the roar of the sea
had risen. The wind was blowing a gale, but there was no lightning in
the storm that night. The out-of-doors was as dark as Erebus. Presently
it grew cold in the room. I went out and shut the doors, and turned on
the resistance heaters. Then I made a cup of coffee and brought it to
Sam. He gulped it down absently, and went on without a word. I went
back to my chair by the wall, and I think I must have fallen asleep.




                               CHAPTER V

                           The Etheric Storm


The next thing I knew, Sam was shaking my shoulder. I sat up, rubbing
my eyes, a bit dazed at first, and uncertain whether I could credit
what I remembered to be a vivid nightmare. But when I looked at the
utter fatigue and the intense anxiety on the old scientist's face, I
knew that it was not a dream.

"I've got it adjusted now," he said. "Suppose you go outside and watch.
We need to know exactly what happens. And it may fail."

As I got up awkwardly, stretching my tired limbs, he climbed on his
stool before the complex array of instruments on the wall, and began to
manipulate the switches and dials.

"I have just to pick up their vibrations and synchronize mine with
them," he said in a voice dull with fatigue. "In five minutes we will
know. With these instruments I can pick up and analyze any disturbance
in the ether, whether it be Hertzian or wireless wave two miles long,
or any of the shorter waves that extend down to heat or infra-red,
through the visible and ultra-violet spectrums, and even below, to the
Cosmic Rays. I can pick up vibrations that other scientists have merely
reasoned ought to exist! I will analyze the force that is being used,
and then put my vibrations against it. I hope to set up an effective
interference, temporarily, at least."

In two minutes I was standing out of doors, with a rug about my
shoulders, in a blackness that was almost palpable. The bitter wind
still blew a little, but the rain had stopped. The ground was frozen,
and a light fall of snow crunched underfoot. Drawing the rug close
about me, I groped my shivering way to the front of the yard, thinking
of the misery and death that the cold must already have brought to
earth, realizing, for the first time, how dependent human welfare is on
the whims of nature.

For a few minutes I waited in the frozen darkness, and nothing
happened. Then began a fantastic thing, a veritable storm in the ether!

A faint living light of violet--blessed dawn of reborn day!--came in
the south; thin misty streamers of violet flame flashed through the
unutterable midnight of the heavens! Violet fire flickered and burned
in a pale and nebulous aurora that ran with lightning speed to the four
corners of the heavens! It danced, it wavered, it marched in gleaming
pointed lances of pulsing flame!

And then the violet became a ubiquitous lucent background for a
weirdly glorious and terrible play of bright, coruscating tongues of
polychromatic fire! Suddenly a great blade of vivid, flaming green cut
through the glowing violet, flashed across the sky in amazing splendor,
and burst into a hundred blazing globes of brilliant emerald, that
rolled down misty tracks of flame to the horizon!

A flickering, many-tongued sheet of amber was born in the east, spread
over the violet haze throughout the heavens, and died into a pale
saffron sheet that slowly changed and warmed to a rich glow of rosy
mist. And from it grew a flickering wall of serpent tongues of orange,
and scarlet, and blue, that danced and spread, and wove themselves into
a curious crown of throbbing flame at the zenith.

All that wild and astounding storm of flame was as still as the grave.
The chill wind had died. The air was keen and quiet. The snow-covered
earth lay vast about me, queerly lit by the changing colors in the sky.
Even the sea was silent, but living in the wonder of reflected light.
All the world was quiet--as if the sun had been utterly gone, and it
had been frozen indeed!

Brighter scarlet and green and purple lights burst up about the horizon
in great fountains of wonderful fire, and poured through the sky in
cyclonic whirls of burning splendor! It was like some vast pyrotechnic
display; but the fire filled the heavens, and shone with incredibly
splendid, living radiance, of every color in the spectrum--the pure and
dripping essence of molten light!

Thin, feathery tongues of soft prismatic colors, great bars of intense
and vivid fire, huge and rippling sheets of blinding brilliance, vast
globes and vague shapes of bright and mist-edged flame, all interwoven
in a Titanic storm of throbbing, flashing, iridescent light--a
whirlwind of coruscating flame, splendid as a cascade of rubies and
diamonds sweeping down in a sunlit stream of molten gold! A pulsing
mist of woven flaming rainbows!

And suddenly there came a spot of pure, supernal blue at the zenith!
Wonderful sight! It spread in a growing circle of blessed light! In a
moment the last faint tinge of crimson fire was fading on the northern
horizon! The skies were blue again!

The sun was far past the meridian! It had been hidden thirty hours! Its
clear warm rays poured over the snow-clad landscape, sparkling in white
brilliance on the frost and dancing on the silent sea. It was wonderful
to see the world again in daylight, to feel the genial warmth of the
restored sun!

Sam had won! He had torn down the curtains in the ether, and lit the
sun again!

I went back in the house and found him slumped down in a chair fast
asleep, with the vestiges of a happy smile left on his face. I had not
realized the strain he had been under. He had been driving himself for
thirty hours like a high-speed machine. The intensity of the effort had
exhausted him utterly. He did not wake up while I was putting him to
bed.

In an hour the radio had come to life. The ether was buzzing like
an angry beehive with reports of the catastrophe, and with mad
speculations as to its cause. The red gloom, followed by the absolute
darkness, had fallen simultaneously upon the entire earth. All lines
of power and communication had been put out of order, as in a severe
magnetic storm, and utter panic had gripped the world. Every man
had fancied himself to be among the few survivors of an unthinkable
catastrophe.

A blanket of cold had fallen upon all the earth. In many sections
there had been torrential rains as the clouds condensed, and there was
considerable loss of life due to flood. In certain sections there had
been terrible blizzards, and thousands had been frozen to death. Vast
damage had been done to young crops, and there was a threat of famine.
But, in most places, enough radiation to cause freezing weather had
been prevented by the dense clouds.

Varied and fantastic theories were advanced as to the cause of the
unique phenomenon. The most popular explanation was that the solar
system had passed through a small, dense nebula, the particles and
condensing gases of which had intercepted solar radiation.

Sam's brief statement, advanced a few days later, that he had found the
disturbance to be due to a strange force acting to erect an etheric
screen or shell about the earth, through which vibration could not
pass, received scant attention despite his scientific reputation; and
his warning that it might return again at any time, and forever, passed
unheeded. He made no mention of what he had done to save the earth.




                              CHAPTER VI

                            The Omnimobile


I now come to the Omnimobile, the machine that Sam had designed with
a view to use in interplanetary navigation. He had worked on it, of
course, more to please me than for any other reason; and we both knew
that there was little chance of the machine's being able to make a
successful voyage through space.

On the day after the sun had been restored, Sam was back in his
laboratory, still feeling out the strange forces in the ether, and
trying to anticipate the next attack. I was wandering along the beach,
rejoicing in the bright warmth of the sun, absorbing the spell of the
wood and the sea and the fresh salty air, regretting that all of it
might be frozen again. There an idea came abruptly to me.

Why not build the Omnimobile?

Designed to withstand the bitter cold and the absolute vacuum of space,
planned to survive the shock of landing on frozen worlds, equipped to
traverse the terrible mountains of the moon, to crawl over the burned
deserts of Mars, or to explore the vast seas of Venus--even if it would
not be able actually to leave the earth, might it not preserve our
lives when the frozen night came again?

A bitter existence it might seem, to spend one's years shut up in a
metal cylinder, in a dark and frozen world, traveling, perhaps, in
absolute night, over still, unseen cities of the dead. But I had my
books--and the Green Girl! I could live on with that wonderful princess
of my dreams, and forget the doom of my kind! It seemed selfish to
think of it--but my love of the Green Girl was so great that I would
have given my all for her, even to dream of her!

When I reached the cottage I spoke to Sam of my idea, and he agreed
with an alacrity that surprised me. We tested the little model again,
and he made revisions and alterations in the design. In a few days we
began construction on the beach two hundred yards below the cottage.
There was no lack of funds, and we pushed the work with all speed. We
had a hundred workmen on the spot, and shops all over the country were
busy turning out the parts and instruments which were rushed to us by
air. I superintended the work myself, since Sam still spent most of his
time in the little laboratory, working with that mysterious force.

The Omnimobile, conceived and designed by Sam, would have been worthy
of a Jules Verne's creative mind, and the great adventure into which it
led us was far more weirdly amazing than any of those old wonder tales
to which I had so passionately devoted myself. Without the hydrodyne,
and a dozen other inventions of Sam's, the machine would have been
impossible. Certainly it merited the name Omnimobile, for it was hard
to imagine a place to which it would not be able to go.

The vessel was of a tapering cylindrical shape, ten feet in central
diameter, and forty-five feet long. The construction throughout was
of the strongest modern alloys of aluminum and beryllium. The hull
was ingeniously braced to enable it to withstand tremendous shocks or
immense pressure. The ship carried an equipment of hydrodyne generators
totalling more than five hundred thousand horse-power--an absurdly
large power plant, it seemed to me.

The machine had caterpillar tread for travel over-land or over the
ocean floor, screws for propulsion over the water, vanes and rudders
for diving, and another more unusual feature--rocket tubes to drive it
through air or through empty space! They were of Sam's invention, and
of novel design. They were loaded with water, and contained resistance
coils through which a tremendous current could be sent from the
generators, heating the special metal tubes to a temperature of some
thousands of degrees, and converting the water into super-heated steam
at enormous pressure, which, escaping at the nozzles, would propel the
ship by reaction.

According to Sam's figures, the machine should be able to hurl itself a
hundred miles in ten minutes, but it seemed very unlikely that it would
ever be able to develop the speed of seven miles per second required to
get clear of the earth's gravitation.

Amidships, above the control cabin, was a low revolving turret, or
conning-tower, containing a second instrument board, so that the
machine could be driven either from there or from below. It carried not
only periscopes and other instruments, but a two-inch automatic cannon,
of a recent design, capable of firing gas, shrapnel, or high-explosive
shells at the rate of two hundred and twenty per minute. There was a
small torpedo tube forward; and, as a further addition to the armament,
Sam had installed transformer and projectors for using the half-million
horse-power of the generators to produce a vast electric arc.

Arrangements for the life and comfort of the passengers were not
lacking. There were oxygen tanks and caustic potash containers to
purify the air. The walls were provided with heat insulation, and the
temperature was automatically controlled by electricity. The control
room below the conning-tower, with the instruments at one end, was
fitted up like a luxurious little library. Forward was the tiny galley
and dining room, aft, a miniature stateroom. The remarkably compact
generators and machinery were in a compartment in the stern. There was
a space in the bow for supplies of concentrated food, spare parts for
the machinery, arms and ammunitions, and miscellaneous supplies.

So fast did the building proceed that, within three months after the
day of darkness, the last plane of the construction fleet was gone. We
began to supply the vessel at once. Sam selected the foodstuff, and
had enough put on board to last us for many years. We had a supply
of ammunition for the machine gun, and an assortment of rifles and
pistols. Sam had a little corner fitted up for a laboratory, and
stocked with instruments and apparatus of all varieties. In the cabin
I put the better part of my collection of the old romances. We were
preparing a little world of our own, getting ready to be cut off from
civilization, forever!

Last of all, Sam set up on board of our craft the great machine with
which he had battled the strange force in the ether to bring back the
sun. He had not given up. I knew that, even if he saw no hope, he would
not surrender so long as he lived. He would carry on the war to the end.

As it stood on the beach below the cottage, the Omnimobile was a
strange-looking machine. Gleaming like silver in the bright sunshine
of those last days, it looked like a vast metal monster. It was bulky,
almost clumsy looking; but it had somehow the air of an irresistible
strength that could force a way through forests and surmount mountain
peaks. In its resistless power, it suggested the old saurian lords
of the jungle. With its low, thick body, and the massive strength of
its construction, there seemed little doubt that it might go almost
anywhere it chose, and be able to take care of itself upon arrival.

The last day came. For two weeks we had been ready to move aboard
whenever the alien force brought the frozen night again to earth. I had
been living in it, while Sam spent most of his time in the laboratory.
I whiled the time away by wandering on the beach, bathing in the surf,
or dreaming idly. I tried to believe I did not care too much. I tried
to think I could go on serenely, the last man alive, forgetting the
dead earth--happy in my dreams of the Green Girl!




                              CHAPTER VII

                       The Globe of Crimson Doom


For some time I had felt that Sam was afraid of something, of a danger
more personal than the freezing of the earth. He had said little about
it, but from his hints I gathered that he thought the mysterious force
he was struggling against might do something to sweep him and his
machine out of the way. He spent hours alone in the little room, with
the apparatus that registered new force in the ether, manipulating his
switches and dials, with the phones on his ears, and his eyes fixed on
the color screen, listening and watching intently--for what?

There was no man on earth with enough knowledge of science to follow
him. None could have understood his explanations, even if he had given
them. So the world will never know.

It was just after sunset that the amazing thing took place that showed
the full power and alertness of the incredible force that menaced the
earth. I was sitting in a folding chair on the narrow white metal deck
of the machine, leaning back against the squat conning-tower, with the
black muzzle of the little gun sticking out over my head. I had a book
in my hand, but it was closed, and I was gazing out at the sea.

Sam was still at the house, although it was past our usual supper time.
Suddenly my attention was attracted by a faint hail. I glanced toward
the cottage and saw him running toward me at a desperate pace, head
down and legs working like pistons.

Though I was unable to imagine what the matter might be, I got up,
opened the hatch, carried down my chair and started the motors, in case
he might want to move the machine. In a moment I heard him scrambling
up the ladder at the side, heard his quick footsteps across the deck.
He dived into the room, shouting breathlessly, "It's coming! Quick!
Start--"

Before I could move, he had brushed me from the instrument board. The
heavy throbbing drone of the hydrodyne units rose higher, and in an
instant the Omnimobile had lunged forward, with a great rattle and
clanking of metal, so suddenly that I fell against the wall.

I was amazed at the speed we developed. Sam was not sparing the
machinery. The clanging roar was almost deafening. The whole machine
vibrated to the engine beat, and it rolled and tossed so much that I
could hardly recover my feet. With face set and expressionless, with
blue eyes straight ahead, Sam stood with his hands on the levers.

He went straight up the beach, without regard for trees or fences.
Suddenly he swung the wheel about in a wild attempt to avoid a shelving
declivity that led down to the water. Our speed was too great. Momentum
carried us on. The machine rolled over completely, tossing me about the
padded conning-tower like a doll. When I got up again the invincible
machine was still forging on, with Sam undisturbed at the controls.

We were two miles from the cottage when he brought the Omnimobile to a
standstill on the hard white sand a hundred yards above the water, and
turned off the engines. With a sigh of relief he turned to face me,
pulling out a red bandanna to wipe the beads of sweat from his brow. He
grinned faintly.

"Rather a narrow squeak, that! I was not looking for it--so soon. We
were just in time; I thought they had us!"

"But what--what is it?" I stammered, still seeing no cause for our mad
flight, though I had no doubt there had been cause enough. "Who--"

"Wait and see," Sam suggested grimly. "I hadn't imagined they could
do such a thing! I just happened to pick up the warning in time. Mel,
the thing we're fighting must be a million years ahead of us! I never
dreamed of such a thing!"

I looked out through the thick lenticular windows of the conning-tower,
but failed to see anything unusual.

"Get your binoculars and we'll go on deck," Sam said. "I'm sure we're
out of danger here."

I was not so sure about that, but I got the heavy glasses, and we
stepped out on the metal deck. I looked back in the direction of the
place whence we had come. The world was very still. Even the sea was
almost silent. The old cottage on the hill behind us seemed suddenly
very desolate and lonely, standing out, a solitary dark point, against
the dying glow of the westward sky. It seemed very bleak and ancient.

And then I saw a curious thing--an astonishing thing. There was
something _bright_ hanging in the air a hundred yards above the
building--something that shone with a silvery gleam! Steadily it grew
brighter against the dull, somber curtain of the darkling western sky.
Then I saw that it was a huge globe of white, metallic light. It was a
great gleaming silver ball, evidently many feet in diameter! It glowed
with a queer, unnatural effulgence! It was like a little floating moon!

In a moment I saw that a faint greenish haze was gathering about it.
With astonishing swiftness a veil of glowing green mist was drawn
about the sphere of shining white. It became a vast luminous green
cloud that swirled and shifted in thin feathery streamers, drawn
around the shining central globe. It swam, and swirled, and grew! It
wheeled madly, dizzily, ever reaching out. It was a mist of flame
like the photosphere about the sun. A strange, weird light shone from
it, lighting the sea and the beach and the woodland about the doomed
building with an uncanny radiance!

Quite abruptly two narrow beams of a thick, misty purple fire darted
out of the silver core of the amazing thing, and, flashing over the
ground, fixed themselves upon the cottage! They were like thin,
unpleasant fingers of purple fog! There was something terrible in the
swift sureness of their motions! They moved as if they were seeing
eyes, or tentacles--feeling, searching!

Suddenly they were gone. In a moment I noted a change. The seething
clouds of green were sucked down. They drew into a dense cyclonic
vortex of flame about the old house, like a falling torrent of molten
emerald. The building was half hidden in the thick, racing fog. I
strained my ears, but not a sound did I hear, save the soft whisper of
the sea. The cloak of green mist swirled about its core with a silence
that was complete--and terrible!

[Illustration: _In a moment I noticed a change. The seething clouds of
green were sucked down. They drew into a dense cyclone vortex of flame
about the old house._]

Suddenly the ancient house burst into strange red incandescence. The
chimney, gables and corners shone with a dull, lurid scarlet fire.
There was no flame, just a dusky, crimson gleam! It grew brighter and
deeper, until it was an intense, bloody glare. And then the climbing
vines and trees about it, gleaming like ruby plants, began to melt
away! The house began to dissolve into crimson light!

The green mist swirled lower. The silvery central moon waxed brighter.
Once or twice thin fingers of purple mist were again thrust out
exploringly, all in a silence of death. And the red gleam grew! The
house glowed as though washed in a rain of blood. And swiftly it faded
into that awful light!

The chimney tottered and came down in a shower of red sparks that faded
into nothingness before they touched the ground. The roof fell, and the
remnant of the walls collapsed upon it in a heap of crimson dust of
fire that faded swiftly--dissolved--vanished!

The little hill was a bare red waste, gleaming with that terrible
scarlet glare. The two purple tentacles of misty flame shot out again,
and swept searchingly over the spot. Suddenly the green mist stopped
its seething motion. Its fires died out. It grew dim, faded, was gone
like a cloud of dissipating steam. The white glow of the silver globe
waxed dull, and suddenly it, too, was no more.

Quickly the red glow faded from the weirdly denuded hilltop, and the
night fell in a heavy mantle. I stood wrapt in a spell of amazement and
terror.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                        Out of the Sea's Abyss


"Well, how was the show?" Sam's voice was a little weak and strained.
Suddenly I was conscious of an unpleasant tremor of the knees. I went
into the conning-tower and dropped myself weakly on a seat. I tried to
speak, but my mouth was very dry. I swallowed twice.

"What was it?" I contrived to articulate at last.

The old man stood erect in the opening, with a hand upon his thoughtful
brow. "I don't know," he said. "I didn't think they could come. They
must have mastered secrets of time and space that we know nothing of.
They have conquered our limitations of distance. They must be ages
ahead of us!"

"But the house--it just melted away!"

"As for that, the emanations of the green cloud must have disrupted
the atoms, allowing the electrons to fall together to make neutrons
(formed of united protons and electrons) so small that they fell
through the ground, toward the center of the earth. That is easy enough
to understand--in fact, I could probably have developed a similar ray
myself, as a result of my work on the hydrodyne. The strange thing is
how they got here!"

"The thing just seemed to appear and vanish!"

"Possibly we could see it only when it was lit with the radiation of
the green. It may have just slipped up and away in the darkness. But it
is more likely--judging from the etheric disturbance it created--that
it did not come through our space at all, but moved by the distortion
of hyper-space--came through the fourth dimension, in effect!"

"And they seemed to know just where to strike!"

"Yes. They must have found that by triangulation on my interference
waves I was doing the same trick for them when the apparatus warned me."

"You were what?"

"I have been working a long time to get the direction of that
mysterious force."

"And you succeeded!"

"You remember the Mangar Deep?"

"What? Oh, yes. Discovered in the South Pacific by Mangar and Kane
about 1945."

"In 1946, I believe. The disturbance comes from there. _It emanates
from a point ten miles below the level of the Pacific!_"

"What! Impossible!"

"Do I make mistakes?" Sam asked softly.

"No. But the discoverers reported only six miles of water. And anyhow,
men couldn't live under there!"

"The exact spot is somewhat south of their soundings. But, Mel, don't
assume that we have to deal with men! We may be dealing with entities
that developed in the sea, even with creatures of the rocks below the
sea! I tell you, it's outside the range of your old anthropomorphic
fiction!"

I could say nothing more. I sat still, with rather unpleasant thoughts.
Intelligences that could reach casually from a point ten miles below
sea level, to wipe out a building ten thousand miles away! Such things
are very good in amazing romances, but extremely hard to face squarely
in real life!

For many minutes Sam was silent. He had pulled out his battered pipe
and filled it absently with illegal tobacco. He stood puffing on it
steadily, with the dim glow coming and going on his tanned face as he
drew. Presently he spoke very softly:

"Mel, we can go in the Omnimobile to see about it."

"Dive into the Deep!"

"We could do it."

"Ten miles of water! Good Lord! That would crush us like--like--"

"I think the machine would stand it."

"But what could we do?"

"We don't know until we know what needs to be done."

"It means death!" I whispered hoarsely. "And the Green Girl! When I am
dead I may dream of her no more! It may be that she lives only in my
mind, and when I die--"

Sam said nothing. He merely waited, puffing away, with his pipe smoke
drifting out into the night. In a moment I had considered, and realized
my selfishness. I thrust out my hand, and he gripped it firmly.

"I knew you would see it, Mel!" he cried with a glad ring in his voice.
"Whoever, and whatever they are, they haven't got us yet! We're still
kicking!"

"We start for the Mangar Deep--"

"--At sunrise in the morning."

We climbed down into the machine, and went together into the galley
to fix supper. Sam got out his old music box and played through
his ancient favorite selections, and then we went to our miniature
staterooms.

But I did not sleep soon that night. The Green Girl came to me in a
fresh and vivid waking dream. She was, as ever, supremely, superbly
beautiful, with dark curls, smiling red lips, and clear, sparkling
violet eyes. I told her of the struggle I had had, and that I was
resolved to set out upon the fateful cruise. And she seemed very happy,
so I regretted my decision no longer. So, very happy, I fell asleep,
and had dreams of the Green Girl that were dreams indeed.

At dawn I was awakened by the rattle of pots and pans in the galley. I
sprang out of my bunk, took an icy shower, and ran into the dining room
where Sam had breakfast ready. The stores had been well selected, and
Sam was a prince among chefs. Whatever our fate, we would approach it
feasting like kings.

He seemed as cheerful and confident as myself. Now that the issue was
determined, the uncertainty of action was removed, and we both felt
oddly relieved. After we had eaten, we started the engines and drove
the machine back to the hilltop where the cottage had been. We got out
and examined the surface of the ground that had been acted upon by the
strange red dissolution.

The earth had evidently been eaten away to a depth of several feet, and
the surface was left covered with a hard, greenish vitrified crust,
smooth and hard as glass. It was unpleasant to think what would have
happened if Sam had failed to intercept the warning of the approach of
that amazing machine--if it had been a machine.




                              CHAPTER IX

                         Into the Mangar Deep


We hurried back into the Omnimobile, climbed into the conning-tower,
and started the engines again. Sam turned the bow toward the sea, and
the great machine crawled slowly down to meet the lapping white waves.
In a few moments they were slapping and splashing against her sides.

On we drove, down the sloping sand. The green water rose about the
windows. In a moment the periscope screen showed that we were entirely
under water. We crawled steadily over the bottom of the sea, deeper
and deeper. All the wonders of the hidden sea-life lay about us,
bright corals and strange shrubs, curious rocks, and beautiful dells
between them, through which silvery fishes and stranger monsters of
the deep were moving. It grew darker, and Sam turned on the powerful
searchlights. We moved on down into stranger regions. But I must not
take space for that, for we were hastening toward a world that was
weirder by far!

In half an hour we closed the valves, which had been left open to let
the water flood the tanks, and started the pumps. We were lifted above
the ocean floor. We stopped the caterpillar tread, and set the screws
into motion. In a few minutes the Omnimobile rose above the surface and
splashed back into the blue waves like a gigantic dolphin of silver
metal!

I climbed out on the deck. The Florida coast was a bright green line
in the west. The serene blue vault of the heavens was illimitable
above us, and the deeper blue expanse of waters lay about in a flat,
measureless plain. The machine throbbed almost imperceptibly with the
motors, and the prow sent out two white wings of water. The plates were
wet and slippery with the spray. I thrilled to feel again the motion of
a powerful craft beneath me, to smell the salty tang of the air, and to
feel the tingle of the salt mist upon my skin. We were making a good
fifty knots, and I had to brace myself against the cool, damp wind of
our progress. Thanks to her gyro-stabilizers, the vessel was perfectly
steady.

I stood there a long time, gripping the low rail, and lost in the
wonders of sea and sky. I felt very much a part of all that splendid,
sunlit world. I felt a deep, poignant regret at leaving it. But I found
myself feeling--with a little surprise--that I could be willing enough
to give up my life to save it!

At last I went back into the conning-tower. Sam stood alert at the
controls, with an odd, exultant light in his eyes, and with a smile of
joy and confidence on his lean face. With his hands on the levers, he
turned to me and said:

"The little old machine's a wonder, Mel! She runs on sea, land, or air!
It's a great feeling to drive her! She'd go anywhere! You know, I wish
we had time to make a trial for the moon!"

"There's no hurry about that!" I assured him heartily. "The moon will
keep!"

Presently I took the controls. Sam fixed dinner, and brought my meal
in on a tray. Then he went to his stateroom. I enjoyed my spell at the
controls. Indeed, as Sam had said, the handling of the machine gave one
a strange sensation of power, of omnipotence, almost. It was the same
feeling of unconquerable, careless power that a god might have enjoyed.
I was almost sorry when Sam came to relieve me in the evening, and I
had to go to my bunk.

When I got up to take his place again, it was night. The generators
were beating steadily, and the Omnimobile was ploughing her way through
heavy seas. The sky was black, and occasional brilliant flashes of
lightning lit the sheets of falling rain that drummed on the metal
deck. When he showed me our position, it was in the Pacific, off
Central America. I knew that he had used the rocket tubes to carry us
over the Isthmus.

For two more days we kept the bow southwest, in the direction of the
Mangar Deep. Sam and I alternated at the controls, and he took time to
prepare our meals when he was off duty. The cabin was fixed up most
comfortably with bookcases, table, and upholstered divan. During the
second long afternoon I looked over my old stories of science, and read
again Verne's immortal story, _Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea_.
I was somewhat amused at the thought that I was aboard a stranger and
more wonderful machine than that of the fantastic tale, and that our
adventures had already been far more amazing than those of the great
romance at which so many practical people had scoffed. If I had known
what was to come--well, I suppose I could not have composed myself
enough to read at all!

At evening on the third day, the sea lay cold and blue about us, and
the northern sun was crawling along the horizon to sink cold and bright
in the clear north-western sky, turning the westward waves into a
glittering sea of frozen fire, and gleaming with prismatic whiteness
on the snow caps of a few vast icebergs that dotted that far southern
sea. Sam stopped the engines. We floated in that wintry, lonely
ocean, infinitely removed from the busy world of man, over the Mangar
Deep--over the lair of the hidden menace!

I stood on the gleaming wet metal deck, shivering slightly from the
chill of the keen south wind, breathing deep of the fresh salty air,
and lost in the never-aging wonders of the sea and sky. I felt even
a distant kinship with the blue, white-capped mountains of ice that
lifted their massive frozen spires to meet the cold sunshine. How
often, in the incredible adventure to come, was I to fear that I was
never again to see the blue of the sky, or to feel the ancient spell of
a limitless surging sea!

I took a last deep breath, and went below. I was a little surprised to
see that Sam was closing the ventilators, opening the oxygen apparatus
and air purifiers, inspecting the pumps and valves, getting ready to
dive.

"Surely we can't start till morning?"

"Why not? At two hundred fathoms night is the same as day."

"I hadn't thought of that. Then--"

"Before we see the sky again, we shall know--"

With a queer tightening in my throat, I saw the manhole closed for
the last time upon the fresh, cold air of the sea. In ten minutes
more we had let the water into the buoyancy tanks. Green water and
gleaming monsters of the sea rushed upward in the steady glare of the
searchlights beyond the windows.

I stood at the valve and pump controls, while Sam busied himself in
seeing to the torpedo tube and the machine gun, and in adjusting his
electric arc weapon. Then he brought out a grotesque suit of steel
submarine armor he had had made, with oxygen tanks and electric
searchlight, etc., attached.

Swiftly we were dropping into the Mangar Deep!




                               CHAPTER X

                          The Depths of Fear


In the deep sea the temperature is just above freezing; the darkness
is absolute; the pressure is many tons to the square inch. But still,
life has been found, even in the greatest depths. It is strange life,
to be sure, for the organisms must be developed to withstand the great
pressure, and to generate their own light. It is an odd truth of nature
that there is some form of life adapted for each locality. There are
the mosses and reindeer of the frigid north, the cactus and lizards
of the burning deserts, the blind creatures of the Mammoth Cave, the
stranger things of the deepest seas! May it not be that there are
entities living out in space, or in the earth's interior, of which we
may never know? Such were my thoughts as we dropped to meet the menace
that had risen from under the sea!

We sank swiftly, and steadily the manometer climbed. The water was dark
but for the bright beams of the searchlights, and very cold, though,
with the insulation and the electric heaters, we felt no discomfort.
The pressure on the plates must have been terrific beyond conception.
It seemed impossible that metal--even our cleverly braced plates of
the wonderful beryllium bronze--could withstand so much, when even the
rocks of the ocean floor "creep" and bend beneath the water's weight!

Thousands upon thousands of feet we sank, and still the sea was dark
and cold! In our wild plunge downward I caught fleeting glimpses of
many of the weirdly grotesque creatures of the deep, flashing past in
the gleam of our lights.

At last Sam had completed his preparations for the emergency that might
arise when we reached our goal. He came into the conning-tower. I
looked at the manometer--in fact, I had been looking at it most of the
time.

"Pressure four thousand pounds!" I read. "That means we are nearly
eight thousand feet down! I wonder how much longer--"

"Remember," Sam said softly. "Remember that we have to go ten miles
down--fifty thousand feet!"

"Fifty thousand feet! Every cubic foot of water weighs sixty-five
pounds. Fifty thousand times sixty-five, divided over one hundred and
forty-four square inches. That is--about twenty-two thousand pounds to
the square inch! Eleven tons!"

"Somewhat more, I fancy, say 23,800 pounds," Sam observed calmly.

"What's the difference? Nothing could live or move under such a weight!"

"The thing we have come to investigate lives there, if it is a living
thing at all."

I said nothing more. Somehow, I did not feel inclined to conversation.
I could think only of the terrific weight of water so near, pressing so
mercilessly upon the thin plates, think only of how cruelly it would
crush and tear us when it found its way in! I gazed at the little
needle with a sort of fascination. It crept slowly around the dial,
counting up the pounds of the irresistible pressure that surrounded us.

The minutes dragged by. The little needle showed a depth of fifteen
thousand feet, almost three miles. The height of a good mountain, and
still it crept up! And yet we were not a third of the way! Suddenly I
heard a splintering crackle that grated roughly on my strained nerves.
I looked down. The unconscious grip of my hand had splintered the top
panel of the back of a chair by my side!

Sam was looking at me, grinning. "I'm glad you didn't have your hand on
me, Mel."

I glanced back at the needle, and shouted in surprised relief.

"It has stopped!"

Truly, the pointer stood still! As we watched it, it hung still a
moment under my riveted gaze, and then crept back!

"It's a turning point! The pressure is getting less!"

"It couldn't be!" Sam said. "Unless we are rising!"

"No! See! The buoyancy tanks are still flooded!"

"The duplicate pressure gauge?"

"It turned back with the other!"

"Look! Yes, we are still sinking." He pointed to the windows. "See! The
fish are still flashing upward in the light!"

In speechless wonder, we stood and watched. Still we were evidently
sinking. Still the dark waters rushed up about us. And still the
needles crept back!

Suddenly Sam seized my shoulder in a hand of iron. "Look!" he whispered
hoarsely, pointing out through the heavy lenses. "Can't you see? A
light! A red gleam beyond our searchlights!"

A switch clicked under the nervous fingers of his other hand, and our
lights went out. In a moment, as soon as my eyes were accustomed to the
darkness, I saw that he was right! The sea was not black! There was a
pale, roseate glow suffused through it!

Steadily it grew stronger. We were coming into a region of light, and
of decreased pressure, at the bottom of the sea! Of all wonders!

The red light grew stronger, until it seemed that we sank through a sea
of molten ruby--through an ocean of blood. Intense red light poured in
through the lenses until I had to hide my eyes. With shaded eyes, Sam
bent over the manometer.

"Only two hundred feet!" he cried. "Fifty! Ten!"

Suddenly the floor fell away from beneath my feet. We seemed to have
dropped from the sea into a lake of fire. A blindingly intense red
glare poured in the windows. I was very sick. The ship reeled about me,
the floor sank, dropped away! I grasped dizzily for the table, drew
myself blindly toward it!

I remember hanging limply and helplessly to the table for a moment,
remember Sam pushing me suddenly away. I have a dim memory of a
crashing thunder of sound that reverberated deafeningly and seemed to
roll away to infinite distances through the fiery mist. And with that
strange, deep sound, my consciousness faded away!




                              CHAPTER XI

                          The Roof of Waters


The next thing I knew I was lying on the floor, with a torrent of icy
water falling on my face. I sat up, sputtering. Sam was bending over me
with a relieved grin on his face.

"Care for any more?" he asked, emptying the pail.

"That's quite enough, thanks," I sputtered. "Where are we?"

"Right here."

"Talk sense," I pleaded, trying to get up, and rubbing the bump in my
head.

"Really, I hardly know," he said, soberly. "It's rather queer. We're
afloat on a smooth, warm sea! The sky is red!"

I stared at him stupidly.

"It's a good thing we had the rockets! If we hadn't used them, we'd
have hit this water like a concrete pavement!"

"Queer, you say! My eye! We're both crazy! It can't be!"

"You might get up and see for yourself."

"You say we've fallen through the Pacific and into another sea?"

"I only know what I can see."

"We did seem to come out of the water into a red mist."

"So it seemed."

"But the Pacific Ocean overhead! We must have come through six miles of
water! And water won't float on air!"

"We have several interesting questions before us."

I got uncertainly to my feet, walked past the calm old scientist, and
climbed out on the narrow deck. Indeed it was a weird and incredible
sight that met my eyes. Overhead arched a great dome of crimson fire.
In all directions it reached down to the dark, warm sea on which we
were floating. Nothing in sight but red sky and dark waves! There was a
light, hot breeze, but the strange sea was very still. Its color was a
blue-black, splashed weirdly with the reflected light of the crimson
sky. It stretched out on every hand to where the red sky rose, utterly
lifeless--lonely and dead.

We had fallen into an unsuspected and incredible world! Miles of water
lay between us and our fellow men. Suddenly I felt an absurdly great
loneliness, a vast homesickness for the world we had left--even if my
fellow men had never meant very much to me! I felt an ineffably intense
desire for the sunshine, for blue skies and green plains, and for the
busy, cheerful cities of men! In fact, I almost burst into tears.

It was not so much that I was afraid. But the place seemed so strange,
that even after I was dead my soul could not find a way out!

If there had been a rock, or an island to break the monotony of the
ghostly, silent sea, it would not have been so bad. But there were
none. The strange dark desert of waters stretched out as far as my eye
could reach! The eerie, scarlet radiation of the sky beat down with
intense heat, and the wind was damp and sultry.

Abruptly Sam stepped out beside me. There was almost a grin on
his lean, tanned face, and he looked somehow very confident and
resourceful. I felt a great wave of faith in him and in the wonderful
machine beneath our feet, rocking silently in the strange, smooth sea.
Impulsively I reached out my hand to him, and he took it with a smile.

"I know how you feel, Mel. But we're still kicking!"

"But the ocean?" I asked again. "What could hold it up?"

"I've been doing some pretty stiff thinking along that line. I have a
theory that might help you, even if I have missed the point. You know
we came through the red gas that makes the curious sky we see. The gas
was just below the water. It's evidently radioactive, or it wouldn't be
luminous. Its emanations might change the gravity of the water above!"

"Negative gravity or levitation?"

"Something of the kind. You know that science has held for a long time
that there is no reason, _per se_, to doubt the existence of substances
that would repel instead of attracting one another. In fact, the mutual
repulsion of the like poles of a magnet is, in a way, an illustration
of that very thing. Even assuming the existence of substances of
negative gravity, they would not be found on the surface of the earth,
for they would escape into space as fast as liberated. The phlogiston
of the old alchemists, by the way, was supposed to be such a substance.

"But suppose the gravity of the water is negatived by the gas. Water,
you know, has the property of becoming radioactive after it has been
exposed to radium emanations, and it is logical enough for it to assume
the qualities of the gas. The water next to the gas may support that
above."

"But it looks as if the gas would bubble out, like air under water," I
said.

"That was the principal objection to the theory. But we know from our
pressure readings that the water is not resting heavily on the gas.
If it is supported by the negative gravity of its lower stratum, the
equilibrium is very delicate, but it would be naturally maintained.

"Suppose the roof of water is lifted. The gas and atmosphere below,
being given more room, would expand. Consequently the gas would be
brought less intimately into contact with the water, the negativing
effect would be reduced, and the balance would be restored. Conversely,
a sinking would compress the gas, increase its effect, and bring back
the balance. Even if the water sank in one place and was lifted in
another, the difference in the density of the gas at various altitudes
would maintain the equilibrium."

"Yes. Yes, I believe I see. A thousand thanks! It makes me feel a
lot better to see how it could be," I said, admiring the wonderful
readiness with which he had formulated his theory. "But can you say how
the gas came to be here, and how there happens to be breathable air
beneath it?"

"Both might have been manufactured by the intelligences we have
come to investigate. More likely, however, the gas comes from the
disintegration of the radium in the earth, and has been rising out of
fissures in the ocean floor and collecting here for ages. The oxygen
of the air may have come from the decomposition of rocks--the earth's
crust is nearly fifty per cent oxygen. This place may be as old as the
sea. That alien power may have been growing up in here through all the
ages that man has been developing outside!"

"You think there may be living things here?"

"No reason why not. In fact, this is the logical habitat for your Green
Girl. Red and green are complementary colors. If there are people
here, green would be the natural color for the protective pigmentation
against this red light!"




                              CHAPTER XII

                            The Second Sea


Leaving to me the visions and the flights of wild hope that his last
words induced, Sam went below. In a few minutes he called me to eat.
Suddenly I realized that I was very hungry. I looked at my watch. It
was eight o'clock.

"Why, is it just two hours since we left the surface?"

"No. It's fourteen!"

Forgetting the intense red sky, the strange, smooth sea, and the damp,
hot wind, I went below to meet Sam's wonderful biscuit, with fresh
steak and fruit from the refrigerator. A very mild and colorless
beginning for adventurers newly fallen into an unknown world, but a
very sensible one!

After the meal, each of us took a turn on guard in the conning-tower,
while the other slept. Nothing happened. The soft hot wind blew
steadily out of the south, the bloody glare of the weird sky was
changeless, and the sea lay about in a motionless desert.

The thermometer outside registered 115°, but on account of the
automatic temperature control, the machine was comfortable enough,
though the heat and humidity on deck were stifling.

When we had rested, we turned the bow of the Omnimobile toward the
north and cruised along at a speed of four or five knots. I stood in
the conning-tower at the wheel, while Sam busied himself with making an
analysis of the air, and of a sample of water from the sea. Presently
he came up out of the little laboratory, with his report.

"The air shows to be 31% oxygen," he said, "and 64% helium, with the
remainder a mixture of various other gases. The barometer pressure
is only eleven pounds, which compensates for the excess of oxygen.
The helium is a good indication of the radioactivity which must have
produced the gas overhead, since helium is one of the ultimate products
of radium disintegration. The oxygen must have come largely from the
breaking up of carbon dioxide by plant life."

"Then there is life?"

"There were microscopic organisms, both animal and vegetable, in the
sample of water I took. The water, by the way, carries only 1.23% solid
matter, mostly sodium chloride. Less than half as much as the sea
above, which has 2.7%."

For several hours longer we moved slowly over the surface of that warm,
silent sea. In all directions it lay flat as far as my eye could reach,
its blue-black depths glancing with the unearthly crimson of the sky.
Sam was still working in the laboratory and looking after the machinery.

And then I saw the first living thing!

My roving eye caught a tiny black speck against the gleam of the bloody
sky. It was soaring, drifting slowly, like a vast bird--its motion was
too irregular, I thought, to be that of a flying machine. I flung the
little port open, and tried to get my binoculars upon it. It was very
far away, but I made out that it was a vast, strange, winged thing. It
seemed very large to be a bird. And its colors were bright--fantastic!
It seemed--I was sure--that its wings were green! But it seemed to be
moving faster than I had thought. I never got it clearly into focus,
and suddenly it dived, and was lost beneath the horizon!

"Sam! Sam!" I called sharply. "I've seen something--something _alive_!"

In a moment he was climbing up into the conning-tower, with a question
on his lips. I described my confused impression of the thing as best I
could, mentioning the strange colors.

"More than likely, Mel," he said, "you wouldn't have recognized it,
even if you had seen it clearly. You could hardly expect to find life
here like that we know. The chances are that evolution has taken a
widely different course in here. Even the tiny things in the sea were
strange to me. And in a world like this, of hot and endless day,
we're likely to find jungles with great insects and huge reptiles--a
fauna and flora corresponding to that of the Carboniferous Era on the
surface."

"Then you think there is land here, trees, even men! You really
think--the Green Girl?"

"That was just an idea, about the green tan. But there is sure to be
land, of some sort, where the lips of this abyss curve up to meet the
water above. And there is no reason why there might not be life upon
it--highly developed life, at that. Life may be as old in this place as
outside, perhaps older, for it has been protected from the cataclysms
of one kind and another that may have swept life off the surface
again and again through the ages. And we know there is some kind of
intelligence here--"

"No wonder they were willing to freeze the earth! They couldn't tell
the difference if the sea were frozen a mile thick!"

Still we held our course to the northward. Presently Sam went back
below again. An hour later the horizon was broken by a line of dull
blue in the north. A thin blue strip appeared between black sea and
scarlet sky, and widened slowly. In another hour I could make out a
wall of towering blue cliffs all across the north, rising from the sea
as if to support the red sky. They were veiled in the mists of infinite
distances. When Sam had made his observations, computed his angles and
completed his calculations, he announced that they were a hundred miles
north of us, and met the red sky at a level four miles above us as we
floated along!

That meant that we were nine miles below the level of the Pacific,
according to Sam's figures. The seat of the menace we thought to
conquer was a mile below us yet!

As the hours went by, and we still went northward at our crawling
pace (we went slowly because Sam thought that the use of the engines
at full power would create an etheric disturbance that would reveal
our position to our mysterious enemy). The jagged rim of the abyss
rose steadily out of the sea. The cliffs, when I focused my powerful
glasses upon them, seemed composed of sheer columns of blue rock,
reaching up to meet the red roof of waters like gigantic prisms of blue
basalt.

At last my searching eyes glimpsed a patch of green below the blue.
A vast slope of green hills drew up out of the red-black sea. They
gleamed with the pure verdant emerald of well-watered grasslands. Here
and there they were marked with huge, strange splotches of purple. I
was ever amazed anew at the vastness of the weird world about us.

Steadily the green and purple slopes lifted themselves out of the dark
sea before us, and stretched up, through vast plains and low hills, to
the sheer wall of rough blue cliffs that lay all about the north, cut
off so sharply at the top by the red sky.

At last we came in view of the shore--fringed with a jungle of green
and lofty forest. Huge those strange plants were, with long thick
leaves, grotesque forms, and fantastic flaming blossoms! I stared at
them through the binoculars. They were like nothing that is or has ever
been above the sea--like nothing that I had ever seen or imagined!
They were strange wild trees of another earth! Their green was weirdly
tinted with purple, or with queer metallic tints of silver and bronze!
Their incredibly great blooms were prolifically borne and infinitely
varied, making the weird jungle an alien fairyland of bright and
multicolored flame!

A fit habitat, indeed, for the monstrous things we found there!




                             CHAPTER XIII

                          The Flying Flowers


It was several miles back of the shore to where the green grassland
rose from the jungle to slope up to the cliffs of gleaming blue. I had
ceaselessly searched the plains and the jungles for a sign of life or
intelligence; but, so far, I had seen nothing save the weird flying
monster of which I had caught a glimpse.

But suddenly a huge winged thing arose from the jungle strip! In a
moment two more had joined it from the shore! In a few minutes a score
of vast weird monsters were circling over the beach ahead! They were
strange things, incredible, almost. I might have doubted my eyes but
for Sam's warning of the strange things we might encounter. Their
colors were bright. The wings were plainly green and of a spread of
many yards! They flew with slow and regular wing-beats.

It was some time before I got one focused clearly in the glasses and
then I gasped in astonishment and terror at the weird creature that
seemed to spring at me from the lenses. It was neither bird nor winged
reptile! It was not an animal at all!

It was a winged plant!

The great flapping wings were broad and green, braced with white veins
like the leaf of a plant. The long body was plated with coarse brown
scales, and tapered to a green-fringed tail. Eight long blood-red
tentacles dangled in pairs below the body. They were thick, and the
coils of each must have measured many yards in length. Each bore at the
end a single terrible claw. _And instead of a head, the thing carried
on the forward end--a flower!_ It was huge, of many petals, brightly
colored! Out of the calyx were thrust three dead-black, knobbed
appendages that must have been organs of sense!

It was a vast thing--unbelievable! It was as large as an airplane! It
was terrible--a nightmare monster! I could scarcely believe my sight,
though, after what Sam had said, I might have expected such a thing.

I do not remember calling Sam. I was too much amazed. But suddenly he
climbed up beside me, and took the binoculars from my unconscious hand.
With a fearful gaze, I watched him raise and focus the instrument,
trying to read in his lean, tanned face the meaning of the astounding
things.

I saw keen interest reflected there, surprise, intense concentration,
but nothing of the strange terror I felt. A sensation of immense relief
came over me, and I made a half-hearted effort to smile as he lowered
the glasses and looked at me, grinning.

"Don't let it get you, Mel," he said. "I was expecting something of
the sort--or more so. They are no more terrible than the old winged
saurians, probably. At any rate, the Omnimobile can take care of
herself. We're likely to meet something worse before we're through."

"I hope not!" I said, piously. "But the things are plants!"

"Possibly. But the idea of animated plants is nothing new to science.
The line of division between the plant and animal kingdoms is rather
vague, and it seems that both developed from a common ancestor. Even
today there are living things that can be classified neither as plant
nor animal. Take, for instance, _Euglena Viridis_, the microscopic
organism that colors green scum on fresh-water ponds. It is a plant,
because it contains chlorophyll, and utilizes sunlight in the
manufacture of food from carbon dioxide and it absorbs salts dissolved
in the water. It is an animal because it can swim about very actively,
and because it can absorb particles of food that it finds in the water.
Carry the evolution of such a thing to the nth degree, and you have the
flying things before us!"

Again, I had to admit that Sam had advanced a most plausible
explanation for an amazing thing, but still I prefer my plants fastened
to the ground.

It soon became evident that the monsters had discovered us. They
approached and circled close above, green wings slowly beating the
air, and the great blooms that were like heads seeming to flicker with
varied colors. The thick, red tentacles coiled below the great brown
shark-like bodies, with terrible talons drawn back threateningly.

"The things may be feeling unpleasant," Sam suggested. "It might be a
good thing to fix 'em a hot welcome."

That had already occurred to me. I let Sam have the controls, and ran
out and loaded the little cannon. Through the thick windows of the
little conning-tower I watched the monsters flying above us. They
followed as we kept up our deliberate advance toward the jungle-covered
shore.

Suddenly one of them dived down upon us. The impact of its heavy,
shark-like body shook the machine, and its great claws grated over the
metal plates with an unpleasantly suggestive sound, as it strove vainly
to rip them open. I felt some alarm. For sheer fighting power I would
match one of those flying plants against any animal that ever walked on
earth. In wing-spread it was fully as long as the Omnimobile, though
the machine was, of course, many times heavier.

I slipped into gear the machinery that revolved the turret, and as
soon as a portion of that rough, armored brown body was fairly before
the gun, I let fire with an explosive shell. The whole machine rocked
with the force of the explosion, and the side of that vast scaly brown
body was torn off. A viscid green fluid gushed out, dyeing the deck and
tinting the water alongside. The terrible grasp of the thing relaxed,
and it slipped off into the sea.

The others were hovering low, but in a moment Sam had submerged the
machine, and we made for the shore under water. In five minutes we
struck a soft, muddy bank. He shifted the caterpillar tread into gear.
The machine waddled up the muddy slope through the fringe of strange
plants, and broke into the weird jungle.

The unearthly radiance of the sky filtered through the jungle roof in a
dull crimson light. In the vague, ominous twilight, huge and monstrous
tree-trunks rose all about us, as much like great fungoid growths as
like normal trees. We pushed through thickets of weird purples and
strange metallic hues, under vast masses of hanging green vines, all
hung with gigantic incredible blooms that were so bright they seemed to
light the dusky forest with their vivid flames of crimson and yellow
and blue!

For perhaps three miles the Omnimobile smashed her deliberate way
like a gigantic reptilian monster through that strip of weird rotting
jungle. Then we emerged on higher ground of a different vegetation.




                              CHAPTER XIV

                         The Prey of the Plant


We stopped the machine on the first little eminence of the open space,
to survey the vastly different and unfamiliar region that lay before
us. It was an open, park-like country. There were broad meadows and low
hills covered with a fine turf of luxuriant green grass. There were
scattering small groves and great solitary trees so profusely laden
with vast purple blossoms that they seemed afire with purple flame.

It was a strange landscape, and not without a certain unearthly beauty.
The rich, green plains and hills lay all about before us, scattered
with clumps of brilliant purple woodland, and stretching up to the
great blue cliffs in the misty distance. A lurid, melancholy weirdness
was given to the scene by the awful scarlet glare of the sky.

Presently we rolled on again, across the broad level meadow, and over a
little stream, and through a copse of flaming purple trees. We had gone
another mile when Sam, still at the controls, shouted above the beating
of the engine and the clatter of the machinery.

"Look, Mel! Get it! Shoot! North of us!"

Still behind the gun, I looked out quickly. To the north was an open
green field of several acres extent. Beyond, the scattering purple
trees rose, dotting the green hills until at last they merged in the
slope that reached up to the cliffs in the misty distance beneath the
amazing sky.

For a moment my eyes searched that strange scene in vain, and then I
saw the huge green wings of one of the terrible flying plants, flapping
deliberately above the brilliantly purple trees a hundred yards to our
right. Sam was already swinging the machine about in that direction.
Without waiting to see the cause of his frantic appeal, I trained the
gun and depressed the firing pin.

[Illustration: _For a moment my eyes searched that strange scene in
vain, and then I saw the huge green wings of one of the terrible flying
plants, flapping deliberately above the brilliantly purple trees a
hundred yards to our right.... Without waiting to see the cause of his
frantic appeal, I swung the gun, trained it, and depressed the firing
pin. "Mel," cried Sam, "one of those red tentacles was wrapped around a
human being."_]

The little gun roared sharply, slid quickly back and forward again in
its recoil cylinders, and the mechanism clicked smoothly as another
shell was thrown into the breech. For a moment my vision was obscured
by the thick white cloud of smoke. Peering intently, I saw the
unearthly monster flying more slowly--sinking. In a moment it was out
of sight behind the purple trees.

"Did you hit it?" Sam cried anxiously.

"I think so. But why all the fuss about that one? There are plenty more
back in the jungle."

"Oh, didn't you see? It was carrying something!"

"Carrying something?"

"Mel, one of those red tentacles was wrapped around a _man_!"

He had brought the lumbering machine about in the direction of the
place where we had last seen the monster. We went at a reckless pace.
The machine rocked and banged, and we were shaken up unmercifully when
we crossed a dry watercourse. Two or three of the trees went down
before our undeviating and irresistible advance, filling the air with
purple clouds of petals from the great bright flowers.

Then I saw before us, thirty yards away, the great strange creature
lying flat on the ground, with wings outspread. Beneath it, in the
coils of one of the thick tentacles, I saw the gleam of a naked human
body.

The machine jerked to a halt and I threw open the manhole and sprang
out on the deck. In a moment Sam was beside me. He had buckled on an
automatic pistol of the latest design and the heaviest caliber. He
handed me a duplicate weapon, with ammunition belt and holster, with
the warning, "We've got to expect the unexpected, and must be quick on
the draw!"

I fastened on the gun, and led the way down the ladder to the ground.
In a few seconds we stood by the dead monster. Seen at close range, it
was an appalling thing, indeed. It was very strange, and even the dead
body of it showed cruel strength. The green wings were like tough green
leather stretched over a metal frame. The body was armored with thick,
rough brown scales. The tough scarlet skin of the tentacular limbs was
smooth and rubber-like. Already the weird flower at the forward end was
withered and black. The ground about the thing was stained with a flood
of green liquid from the terrible wound the shell had torn.

I hurried around it. Only the shoulder and arm of the human prey
were in sight. Yes, it was a human being, and the skin had the clear
smoothness of youth. I bent closer and perceived, with an odd admixture
of feelings that made my heart beat wildly and then pause until I
reeled, that the skin had a soft greenish tan. I saw that the body,
lying under the wing alone, had not been crushed by the fall of the
monster.

"We'll be able to tell what manner of mankind we have to deal with
here," Sam said, though I scarcely heard him. "If our man was at all
civilized, there ought to be ornaments, or remnants of clothing. I
hardly expected human life here. But it may be a human science that is
threatening our world!"

He stumbled over the end of one of the thick red tentacles. It moved
uncertainly, and he stopped in a sort of fascinated horror. "God!" he
muttered. Indeed, it was a terrible thing. The slick red limb, four
inches thick, ended in a suction cup, with a hideous claw, a good
twelve inches long, fastened at the side. It made one's flesh creep to
think of that terrible claw ripping and tearing flesh, or of the cupped
end of the tube sucking blood from it.

I pulled at the still white form beneath the wing. One of the crimson
tentacles still clung closely about the young body. I tried to pull
it free; but at my touch it seemed to tighten with a sort of aimless
reflex action. Sam got out his sheath knife and cut at it. It was very
tough, and the viscid green slime flowed from the abrasions in its
rubber-like membrane, but presently we cut it in two. I drew the body
from under the wing.

I echoed Sam's exclamation. "It's the body of a woman!"




                              CHAPTER XV

                            The Green Girl


It was, indeed, the form of a woman--rather, of a girl. The eyelids
were closed and still. There was no breathing, and no perceptible
beating of the heart. But the body was very beautiful. The hair
was soft and dark; the skin, white with just a hint of the green
coloration. The features were regular, classic--perfect! The lips were
still very red.

That form was familiar to me--it was the dearest shape of my dreams!
It was the Green Girl! There could be no mistake. This was the flesh
and blood reality of the delightful vision that had been the joy of my
life. At last, my supreme wish was granted! I had found the Green Girl!
But too late! She was so white and still!

As Sam remarked, his words reaching me faintly through a gray daze of
despair, she seemed to have belonged to a rather highly developed race
of people. In fact, so far as physical perfection goes, she was without
parallel; and physical and mental endowments usually go hand in hand.
The wide white forehead betokened a keen intellect.

Sam had expected to find ornaments on the body, but no such things
as we did find! There was a thin band of metal about the waist! The
twisted fragments of a strange metal object were upon the back,
fastened to the white shoulders with metal clamps that gripped them
cruelly!

It was evident that something, recently torn away, had been fastened to
the back of the girl!

Sam brought a file from the machine. I helped aimlessly, mechanically,
and we cut that metal frame off. As we worked over that white body,
with its soft tints of green, I saw strange, livid marks upon the back,
that stood out sharply from the warm hue of the skin! I had never seen
anything like them. They were splotches of a dull violet color! They
looked like burns, or stains, that must have been caused by the thing
that had been fastened to her body.

"Radium burns?" I questioned Sam in apathetic curiosity.

"No. Something similar, perhaps. Radium emanations whiten the hair,
but the color of the skin is not affected except by inflammation. This
is the effect of atomic radiation of a shorter wave-length, I think.
My hands were oddly stained for months while I was making my initial
experiments with the artificial generation of the cosmic ray, which
led to the hydrodyne. I found the cause and developed an effective
treatment. I imagine that burn is the chief cause of her coma."

"Coma! Then she isn't----" My heart beat madly, and a mist came before
my eyes.

"I think there is hope. She seems not to have been injured by the
monster, or to have been seriously hurt by the fall. She is in a
profoundly comatose state, due to the electronic burns, and also to
physical exhaustion and the terrible hardships of which her appearance
gives evidence."

"If you can save her----" I fell on my knees and raised that delicate
head in my arms.

"Let's get her to the machine. It's cooler in there. We'll do what we
can."

I picked up the silent body, still warm and limp, and carried it to the
machine, up to the deck, and down into the cabin. I gently placed it on
the divan, and nervously urged Sam to haste.

He deliberately began his work. He had included medical supplies
in our equipment; and he was a doctor of considerable skill, whose
special knowledge of the effects of etheric vibration was of greatest
value here. I could do little except stand and watch him, or stride
impatiently up and down the room.

First he quickly prepared a thick red liquid, with which he bathed the
violet-colored burns. Then he made a hypodermic injection, and next
administered a small quantity of some kind of gas--a mixture of nitrous
oxide, or laughing gas, with something else that I did not recognize.
In a few minutes the beating of the heart had become normal, and the
breathing was resumed. He had me cover the patient up, and it soon
became evident that she had passed into a deep but natural sleep.

I sat by the couch, feasting my sight on the reality of the vision
that had been mine so long, in a fever of impatience for the time
the beautiful sleeper might awake, so that I could speak to her, yet
fearful of making a sound that would disturb her.

Sam had gone out to examine the dead monster more fully. In half an
hour he came back in the cabin, carrying a queer writhing green thing
in his hand. He held it up silently for me to see. With a sickening
sensation, I perceived that it was a miniature replica of the great
flying monster!

It was no bigger than a dove! The madly fluttering wings were a bright
rich green, very delicate and soft. The thin, slender tentacles that
clutched Sam's hand, or scratched harmlessly at it with undeveloped
claws, were a pale rose color. The thin, fish-like body was almost
white, and the little bloom at the end of it was now an intense violet
in color, while the little black sense organs were thrust stiffly out
of it.

"Quite a find!" Sam said. "We ought to learn no end of things from
studying it, if we can keep it alive."

"Quiet!" I whispered. "Don't wake her! But where did you get it?"

"Tore it out of a curious pouch on the back of the old one. A cunning
little creature, isn't it?"

"Not to my way of looking at it!"

"I wonder what it eats? Most likely it's carnivorous. The claws would
suggest as much. And that assumption would demand that there must be
large game of some kind to support the winged plants."

Sam carried the little monster on into the galley. In half an hour,
since he had not come out, I left the sleeping girl and went in to see
him, fearing that he had been bitten or stung by the thing. I found him
with the grotesque little creature perched contentedly on his finger,
sucking with the thin pink tentacles at a wisp of cotton he had soaked
in condensed milk. An odd thing I noticed about it. The little bloom on
the end of the body, which had been purple a short time before, was now
white, flushed only with a pale pink glow.

"It's as friendly as a kitten," Sam said. "I'm going to name it
Alexander. No reason why it should not develop into a young conqueror."

"Keep it, and give me a pet rattlesnake!"

And it was well he did keep it.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                           Xenora of Lothar


I went back to the beautiful sleeping girl, and sat down again in my
rapt contemplation of the quiet charm of her face. She was breathing
quite normally, and the face bore a slight smile of pleasure. Suddenly
she moved, and the eyelids were raised. Clear violet eyes looked
straight into mine--they were those eyes that have haunted me always.

"Melvin Dane!" she breathed in a voice that was low and musical and
wholly delicious. She knew me! She spoke my name! Truly, it was the
Green Girl! She was aware of the meeting of our minds upon the ether!
"My chieftain of dreams!"

From beneath the light covers she reached a slender rounded arm, white,
with just a hint of green tan. I took her hand in my own, feeling a
strange thrill at the touch. After a moment of hesitation, when I
struggled fiercely with that thrill, relaxing to it briefly, I put her
hand quickly to my lips, and then released it.

I did not feel capable of speech. For all the hours since we had found
the girl, I had been undergoing a storm of emotions--alternate joy and
despair. Now, when the Green Girl actually smiled upon me, I forgot all
my old dreams of how I would cross oceans and voyage through space to
take her in my arms. I sat still, with a curious lump in my throat, in
incredulous joy, not daring even to surrender to the delicious thrill
of her touch.

She laughed softly and questioned, "From whence did you come, chieftain
of my dreams, or am I dreaming still?"

"It's no dream," I began awkwardly. "Though I can hardly feel that it
isn't. I came from a land above the red sky. I have always dreamed of
you! And now I find you real--living! What is your name? Do you have
people?"

"I am Xenora. My father was the last prince of the old city of Lothar.
My people now are few."

"You spoke my name! You already knew it?"

"Yes, Melvin Dane, I have dreamed of you since I was a child. Even now,
before I awoke, I had a curious dream of you--I thought you were coming
to me through the sky in a ship of fire." The poor girl had raised
herself on her elbow. Now she lay back on the pillows again as if she
were very weak.

"So you have known me always, too!"

"Since one day when I was a child. The old lost city was my playground,
and even when I was very small I wandered alone through the great
palaces of old Lothar, dreaming of the ancient time when her warriors
were great. One day I found a strange machine in a ruined tower room.
Curious sounds came out of it when I put it to my ears. And then came
the vision of you--of the white prince of my dreams. Day after day I
slipped back, to dream of you. But even when I could go back no longer,
you still came to me in dreams."

"But now they are dreams no longer! You are mine!" I exulted.

I thought there was something wistful in her smile, a hint of sadness
in her sparkling violet eyes. "Yes," she breathed, "even for a little
time, it is real. A little time, before the end."

She rose a little, resting on her elbow. I took her hand again. How
slender and small it was! She still smiled, a little wanly.

"Don't speak of the end!" I said, unconsciously lapsing into the
strange tongue in which I had so often conversed with her. "I have
found you. You are safe. The flying thing is dead!"

For a moment there was frank admiration in her violet eyes that went
oddly to my head. "You killed it! You are like the great warriors of
old!"

"Hardly," I demurred with painful honesty. "I did nothing except push
down a little pin."

"But the Lunak, the flying thing, is not what I fear. It had taken me
from a fate that was far worse. It was carrying me from the power of
the Lord of Flame!"

Her eyes dilated as she pronounced the words, as if they were a curse
of fatal horror. For a moment she seemed to struggle fiercely with
some terrible fear. She sank back rigid and unconscious to the couch.
I sprang to her and lifted her in my arms. I started to call Sam, but
in a moment her body relaxed, and her breathing was resumed, though she
did not open her eyes.

Still, I felt no haste to put her down. I brought her a little closer
to my heart, and my lips were very close indeed to hers when suddenly
her violet eyes opened wide. I almost dropped her in my speechless
confusion, and I felt myself turning red. Embarrassed more than I care
to say, I hurriedly departed for the galley.

I found Sam whistling cheerfully and busy making apple pies for dinner.
I have known several men who called themselves scientists, but Sam is
the only one of them who had mastered the science of cooking. He used
to say that if he were going to be hanged, he would want to cook and
eat his dinner first.

"What did you do with the little--reptile-plant?" I asked.

"Oh, Alexander's gone to bed," he said lightly, pointing to a
ventilated cardboard box on the shelves. "But how are you coming on
with your specimen?" he questioned with a grin.

"Xenora seems--er--recovering very well. Perhaps you had better see
her. She might think--that I----"

As Sam, with an understanding nod, walked toward the cabin door, I
climbed out on deck, to think about it all. The great trees still
whispered a little in the hot south wind, which was laden with the
unfamiliar fragrance of the great purple flowers. The rich green grass
moved in long waves before it. The red glare still beat down with a
torrid intensity. I gazed up the vast slope of purple and green, to the
blue cliffs in the distant north, and wondered about what the girl had
told me--and about what she thought of me now. I cursed myself for my
impulsive action.

A city of ruined palaces! A fallen race that had had a science great
enough to build a radio machine--if such it was--which she had found
and over which our minds had met! And a thing more terrible, and the
flying plants! What had she meant by the words, "The Lord of Flame,"
the mere utterance of which had overwhelmed her with horror?

Then I thought again of the metal bands and frame we had cut from her
body, and of the strange burns upon her skin. What was it that had
caused them? Did all of that link up with the menace that threatened
the earth? That might even now be doing its work?




                             CHAPTER XVII

                           The Lord of Flame


I must have stood there many minutes, lost in fearful reverie.
Unconsciously I heard Sam and Xenora moving about below, heard faintly
the murmur of their conversation. At last my grim forebodings of the
horror that was to come were interrupted by Sam's cheerful hail, and I
went below. I came upon Xenora in the cabin. She was arrayed in a fresh
suit of my white flannels that Sam had laid out for her; and evidently
she had been under the shower, for drops of water still gleamed on her
dark hair. She looked freshly, incredibly beautiful, dressed even as
she was.

I must have flushed somewhat, for she laughed at me. But she showed no
anger or displeasure--she had not resented what I had done. She looked
squarely at me with those cool violet eyes that shone with humor and
human feeling. I read honest understanding in their clear depths, and
suddenly I went to her and held out my hands. She took them in her
slender ones.

Presently we went in together to Sam's wonderful feast. He had the
little dining room spick and span as usual, with the windows screened
and the white lights going to shut out the terrible red glare. It was
very cool in the soft breezes from the fans, and we three sat down in
comfort to the delicacies he had prepared.

Sam still remembered what I had taught him, so many years ago, of
Xenora's language, so that he was able to converse in it. "It'll be
some revelation to the old dead-heads at the Academy if we ever get
back and publish our account," he said. "They have never admitted
telepathy, just because the phenomenon of thought transference depends
upon such delicate attunement of minds that it cannot be reproduced at
will. Of course, we don't know just how much the radio had to do with
it in your case. Undoubtedly it served as a carrying wave, at first
at least. But anyhow, it would be some bombshell to toss among my old
associates!"

"Who cares what they think about it?" I said. "We've found her. That's
all that matters!"

Xenora sat down eagerly. I found joy in watching her eat. She
manipulated her unfamiliar fork with instinctive culture, and seemed to
like Sam's viands immensely. And she ate with the restrained eagerness
of one who has not touched food for some time. What misfortunes had the
brave girl been through?

Presently, when she was somewhat satisfied, Sam began questioning her
in an effort to find out something of the strange world about us.
"Where do your people live?" he began.

"Once Lothar was an empire that girdled the central sea. But many
lifetimes ago the evil power of Mutron arose, and our people were
conquered by the slaves of the Lord of Flame. Now there are but a
handful of my race, living in the forests by the northern cliffs. And
even they are taken to serve the Lord of Flame----"

"The Lord of Flame! What is that?" Sam cried in amazement.

"It is a dreadful thing--a serpent of green fire that dwells in the
violet mists of the chasm of Xath," she said hastily. "But let us not
speak of it. No man speaks of the Lord of Flame, for it hears--stay!
Oh, horror! Do you not--feel it?"

And indeed, at her words, I felt a strange and alien thrill, as if the
revealing searchlight of some dreadful power had been suddenly thrown
upon me, as if some strange wind of fear had blown upon my soul. I
shivered involuntarily, and crouched closer to the others, trying to
drive the horror from my mind.

"God!" Sam breathed hoarsely. "What can we be up against?"

In a moment the girl went hurriedly on, as though to change our
thoughts to other things. "Many sleeps ago I was taken by the men of
Mutron, and put in the power of Xath. They sent me on a ship to fight
the Lunaks. We fell in with a vast number of them, and they brought the
vessel down. The fire-crystal was torn from my back in the wreck, and
I was free. I ran for the trees, but the Lunak caught me. And that was
the last I knew, until I woke, from my dream of--of----"

She turned to me with a little smile, as if such weirdly incredible
adventures were to be taken as a matter of course. I could not speak
for the pity and horror that were mingled with my admiration for her
courage. But I could, and did, reach under the table and take her hand.
Thereafter each of us contrived--after a fashion--to eat with one hand.

That brief and puzzling account of her adventures was all that
Xenora was able to give us until experience would enlarge our common
vocabularies. Certainly it offered plenty of food for conjecture. She
had little scientific knowledge; and when Sam continued his questions,
the accounts she gave of the origin and meaning of the strange things
she mentioned smacked more of myth than of history.

"Has the Lord of Flame always been, Xenora?"

"No," the Green Girl answered. "Back in the beginning, ten thousand
lifetimes past, the men of Lothar ruled, and there was no Mutron to
carry them to Xath. The warriors of Lothar were very brave. They fought
the Lunaks, and hunted the beasts of the plain. The kings of Lothar
reigned in a hundred cities that ringed the central sea, and there was
food and joy for all.

"But the Lunaks were very wise. When the great men of Lothar brought
weapons of fire to fight them, they went into the jungle and laid an
egg, and guarded it, and there sprang up the Lord of Flame! It is a
serpent of green fire, as thick as a mountain and as long as a river!
All the warriors of Lothar went to meet it, and it slew them with a
breath of fire! It took slaves of our people and carried them into the
fire-pit of Xath.

"And from that day, through countless lifetimes, our people have been
worshipers and slaves of the Lord of Flame. Those who are taken are no
longer as men, but as sleepers walking, with the fire-crystal on their
backs. They fly in ships of Mutron, the City of the Sleepers, and rule
with a heavy hand in the name of the Lord of Flame. None escape them!"

"Well, I'll be d--er--flabbergasted!" Sam exploded. His face was a
study. Incredulous disbelief was there, and amazement, and something
of fear and horror, too. What the girl said had all the earmarks of a
fairy tale. But we had seen the metal upon her body, and the purple
stains--and we had felt that sudden, inexplicable wave of fear.

"Is it possible? Mel, it can't be! It's too fantastic!"

I could make no answer. "And you, Xenora. You were taken by that
thing?" I cried in sudden horror.

"I was taken in a ship, and carried to Mutron, the City of Fear. There
they fastened on me the fire-crystal. Then my mind was in a sleep,
and my limbs did not what I willed. Until the ship fell my life was a
nightmare of toil and terror. The Lunak took me, and I knew nothing
until you found me."

Xenora still seemed rather weak and tired from her terrible ordeal.
After we had eaten, Sam and I conducted her over the ship, with a view
to convincing her of the wonderful power of the machine and thus to
quiet her fear of that mysterious menace. We started the engines and
moved the machine a little. I fired the gun for her edification, to
show how the monster had been killed, and Sam showed her how to blow
the siren, and even let her pull the cord. Then we took her back to a
stateroom, and turned it over to her.

As she went into the room, Sam proposed that he and I go hunting. His
real object, I think, was to get some fresh meat for the little winged
plant, but we wished to learn as much as possible of the fauna and
flora about us.

I was not eager to leave the machine, but we were armed with the best
of weapons, and there seemed to be little danger. Then, we intended
to be gone only a few minutes. When we were ready to start I tapped
on Xenora's door, to tell her that we were leaving, but she made no
answer. I suppose that she was already asleep.

We climbed up on deck, and closed the hatch behind us.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                       Lost in the Purple Forest


We walked off east through the level green meadows, beneath the
scattered trees that were bright with purple blooms. For my own part,
I was much more interested in the vegetation than in any game we might
come upon. In fact, I would not have been greatly disappointed if our
hunt had been in vain.

The leaves of what I have called grass were really so wide and thick
that it was hardly grass at all. The higher stems of it bore myriads of
tiny, bright-red flowers. The great trees were, in shape and foliage,
somewhat like the oak, though the rich profusion of the purple flowers
almost concealed the leaves. They bore small fruits, in appearance a
little like the date, which, as we were later to learn, were edible.
But, in all the time I was in that strange world, I found no single
plant that was exactly like any I had known above.

Indeed that was a strange hunt, under a flaming scarlet sky, nine miles
beneath the ocean, through forests of the purple trees that burdened
the air with their unfamiliar fragrance, in search of we knew not what
in the way of game.

We tramped steadily eastward over the green meadows for perhaps half an
hour, rewarded with the sight of no living thing. The Omnimobile had
long been out of sight. We crossed a low greasy ridge and made our way
out across another broad smooth valley.

At last, as we looked from a screen of brush at the edge of a little
meadow, we saw an odd-looking creature gazing unalarmed a hundred yards
away. It was somewhat larger than a hog, with gray, hairless skin and
long white tusks or horns. It had an oddly heavy, barrel-like body.

It must have winded us, for it threw up its head with a peculiar
squeal, tossing its great tusks. Sam and I both fired. We have never
agreed which of us hit it, but it slumped over on the green vegetation.
We hurried up to it. It was quite dead. It had great claws, and
somewhat resembled a sloth, although it was exactly like nothing that I
had ever seen.

Sam took out his knife and skilfully removed half of the skin, wrapping
up a piece of meat in it. The beast had thick rolls of fat along the
back, but the flesh beneath looked so nice and tender that he took some
of it to try for steak.

"We'll try some of it broiled when we get back," he anticipated,
smacking his lips.

"Let's hurry on," I said. "We've been gone longer than I intended,
already. What if Xenora wakes up and we're not there?"

"Let's see," Sam said doubtfully. "The wind was from the south, wasn't
it?"

I looked around in sudden panic. I was almost sure that I knew the way
back to the machine--almost!

The strange world about us was suddenly very alien and cruel. The
plains were lonely and flat and dead. The trees were suddenly wild and
mysterious, as if they concealed strange monsters. There was a ghastly,
unearthly menace in the red gleam of the sky.

In all directions the country looked much the same. There was no
definite landmark. We stood there for a time, scanning the unfamiliar
panorama, in the beginning of panic. There were half a dozen groups of
trees, any of which might have been the one from which we fired. It
occurred to me that it would be very inconvenient if one of the flying
plants came along, and I began to think of other things that might
happen. I came to a tardy realization of our helplessness and utter
ignorance of the dangers that might surround us.

The purple trees and the scarlet sky seemed to leer at us, to gather
closer, to laugh in fiendish joy at the unnamable doom they might have
in store for us. Unconsciously I drew my pistol, and my muscles were
involuntarily tensed, so that I started when Sam spoke.

"Of course we can see the wall of cliffs in the north. That will give
us the general direction. If we can get up on that hill, we might be
able to see the machine."

He pointed toward a round, bare, green hilltop that rose several
hundred feet toward the red sky. It was perhaps a mile away, in the
direction of the hazy blue cliffs. He slung the piece of meat over
his shoulder and we set out over the open field. It was very hot, and
the perspiration was dripping from us. I had hardly noticed the damp,
hot wind before, but now it felt like a blast from a furnace. The
intense scarlet radiation of the flaming sky dried up our energy. The
steady beam of heat brought over us a growing languor, a depressed and
spiritless weariness.

The whole weird region was very still. The only sounds were the soft
sighing of the wind in the trees, and the thrashing and rustling of our
feet in the rank grass. The tiny scarlet flowers danced before the wind
almost like little insects, and a few brilliant petals blew sometimes
from one of the sparsely scattered trees.

"Phew!" Sam whistled, stopping to mop his brow with the huge red
bandanna he had tied around his neck. "This is beginning to feel like
the Sahara! I'm glad I didn't happen to be a native of the place! You
bet the machine will look good, when we find it!"

"If we find it," I could not refrain from saying.

In five minutes more we were far up the side of the little hill. The
side of the eminence was bare of the great flowering trees, so the
strange forest lay about us southward for many miles. Eagerly we looked
in the direction that should have been southwest, for the Omnimobile.

A vast stretch of the rolling plateau lay before our eyes, low
verdant hills, and vast green meadows, scattered with the brilliant
purple trees, singly and in groves. Far away, all across the southern
horizon, stretched the black sea on which we had landed, glancing with
the crimson light of the sky. But nowhere, in all that vast strange
expanse, did we catch a glimpse of the machine.

"It must be just in a low place," Sam said hopefully. "Or, I think I
remember now that there was a little grove just north of it. We will
see it in a minute, if we climb higher up."

"I hope so," I said, raising my binoculars for a better look.

"And we have compasses and instruments to guide ourselves around the
world, if we'd just thought to bring them!"

"It's no use!" I said. "Let's go on to the top."




                              CHAPTER XIX

                          The Hill of Horror


We climbed up the last few yards to the summit, and gazed across toward
the dim blue cliffs that rimmed this world on the north. We stood on a
great divide. A vast valley lay before us, stretching away until it was
veiled with a faint rosy haze. The curious checkered expanse of green
plain and purple woodland sloped far, far away to the north. Perhaps
twenty miles away was the vague outline of a great silver lake, dyed
with the light of the crimson sky.

Just back of the lake seemed to be a shore of low black cliffs. And
beyond those ragged peaks, and beneath the towering and rugged columns
of blue that threw themselves up to the bloody sky, was a strange sight
indeed!

There was a weird flicker of dancing lights in that far-flung crimson
mist, as if it reflected strange infernal fires in a pit behind the
low black wall. There were faint and moving gleams of violet--of pale
violet flames that changed and rose and fell. Vague tongues of violet
fire wove themselves throughout that distant rose-colored mist, with a
writhing, rhythmic motion. They formed curious shapes of flame, that
faded strangely and came again!

But my description is futile. The important thing was not what we saw,
but what we _felt_! A curiously unpleasant sensation of helplessness,
and of strange horror, came over me. I felt as if I were stealing
a forbidden glimpse of an ancient and incredible hell! Fear swept
over me--alien, inconceivable terror--like a keen and bitter wind
that numbed my brain! I felt the horror of a sentient force, utterly
inhuman, devoid of all human knowledge or understanding, as cold and
remote as the frozen night of space!

It was terrible--an intangible _aura_ of fear that reached out of that
pit and tugged at our souls with the icy hand of stark horror! I can
give the world no conception of the overwhelming terror of it! Nor
would I if I could, for such things are better forgotten. I dropped
my rifle and clenched my hands, trembling. I braced my feet as though
against the force of a physical wind that was striving to carry me
toward that abyss of nebulous horror-light!

I looked at Sam. He stood very still, leaning back, with hands raised
and jaw dropped. In his eyes was the look of the fresh and innocent
soul that struggles with a pitiless terror that it cannot know or
understand! Such a look I had never seen before--and God grant that I
may never see it again!

My gaze was drawn irresistibly back into that mantle of moving light.
Even as I watched, a pillar of green flame, very bright and broad,
thrust itself up through the wavering mist of violet fire, and into
the crimson haze. It was like the slender head of some obscene green
reptile. It reached up--incredibly! It writhed and twisted about! It
_was_ like a great serpent of fire. And it _saw_ us!

It grew still with awful attention. Eternities seemed to pass as the
dreadful thing hung there, motionless, like a vast frozen pillar of
twisted emerald flame, like a column of curdled green fire, with
curious throbbing changes in its brightness. I felt a weird force
flowing out of it. And I knew that it was _watching us_!

"My God!" Sam muttered. "My God!" I looked at him again. His thin face
was very white, and beaded with perspiration. He was mechanically
mopping at his forehead with the red handkerchief, and staring at the
mist of flame with the glaze of terror upon his eyes.

I struggled mightily to throw off the spell of amazement and terror--of
alien and unutterable horror--that was grasping at my mind. It was a
heart-breaking effort. I moved. I seized Sam's arm and shook it. He
swayed drunkenly, with his eyes still on the awful lights. He was like
one in a trance--like a man in a dream of death!

And I felt those icy fingers of unthinkable doom closing about my own
mind. I was paralyzed again, with my eyes drawn back to the north.
The snake's head of frozen green still throbbed strangely, and the
flickering violet aurora still kept up its storm of varying motion, in
the dim rosy haze into which the awful head was lifted.

Something was reaching toward us, out of the pit! I knew there was
intelligence in it--a _will_, inhuman, and unthinkably strong! It was
calling us, compelling us! I knew that in a few moments we could fight
no more.

Suddenly a low sobbing sound reached us on that warm, humid south wind,
a sound that wailed uncertainly behind us, and rose to a piercing
shriek, and slowly died away into the distant south, echoing weirdly on
hills and trees as it rolled and sank.

Sam started with a hoarse cry, and went off down the hill toward the
north at a stumbling run--toward that abyss of alien horror! A moment
more I struggled desperately, but that pitiless power overwhelmed me! I
followed in his tracks!

And then, a clear rich voice reached me from beyond the hill--a shout
in Xenora's rich and ringing tones. It had a clear human overtone of
confidence and courage. "Come back, Melvin Dane! Come back, Sam!"

The old scientist stopped uncertainly, passing his hand dazedly before
his brow. Abruptly the terror was gone from my mind! The love and the
courage of the brave girl flowed into me. And suddenly, with the green
light still pulsing through it, as though sent by a mighty heart, the
terrible thing in the north dimmed slowly and faded away! Still the
violet lances flickered through the rosy mist, but the green thing was
gone--and we were free!

I took Sam's hand, and we turned our backs on the amazing play of fire
above the incredible pit, and hastened to the trees from which Xenora's
voice had seemed to come. We reached the little grove, but I did not
see the girl. Suddenly I had the persuasion that I had not actually
heard her with my ears, after all!

"Xenora! Xenora! Are you here?" I called uncertainly.

Sam was still trembling and mopping at his forehead. "She wasn't really
here, I think, Mel," he presently said in a strained voice. "She must
have reached us with telepathy."

For a long time then we stood there under the flowering trees--very
close together, feeling all the awful mystery of the strange world
about us--and thinking of what had happened.

"What was it?" My silent lips at last formed the question.

"'The Lord of Flame!' Xenora said. 'The Lord of Flame!' 'A serpent
of green fire that dwells in Xath below Mutron!'" Sam repeated
mechanically. "I would to God I knew what it is!"

"And what was that awful sound?"

"That was the siren of the Omnimobile, I think. You know we showed
Xenora how to operate it. Probably that saved us, by attracting our
minds from the Thing while Xenora reached us."

"Then if we go toward it----"

At the instant the wild, sobbing shriek rose again, very welcome for
all the wailing qualities of its tones. In a moment we were hastening
down the green hillside among the purple trees, in the direction from
which the sound had come. Twice we heard it again. And in half an hour
we saw the glint of the silver metal side of the machine beyond a
thicket of purple bloom!

I have seen few more welcome sights than the Omnimobile was then. The
heaviness of it, the threatening nose of the little gun, the air of
irresistible power about it, and even its clumsy, beast-like appearance
were reassuring. Sam gave a cheer, and we made the last hundred yards
at a run. At last we stumbled up the metal ladder and stood upon the
narrow deck again.

We clambered through the manhole. The white electric light of the
interior was in strange contrast to the crimson gloom, and the coolness
of the air was very refreshing. Xenora was in the cabin, anxiously on
her feet.

"It was the Lord of Flame!" she whispered. "And you escaped!"

"Thanks to you, my dream girl," I said, taking her boldly in my arms.




                              CHAPTER XX

                               Sam's Pet


"I felt it watching you--calling you--and I pulled the cord that makes
the great cry," Xenora whispered, after a long, long time.

"Thank God you did! It saved us! We were lost!" And I told her of the
amazing storm of flames, of the Thing that had risen out of them, and
of the irresistible spell of terror, from which she had awakened us.

"Yes," she said. "It was the Lord of Flame. He watches the world from
Xath. He knows the acts of every man!"

I must have reeled a little with fatigue, for suddenly the girl looked
at me with quick sympathy brimming in her eyes. "But you--my white
prince of dreams--you are very tired. You must rest."

Abruptly I realized that I was tired, dead with fatigue, with an
unutterable weariness not only of body but of mind, for the horror had
exhausted my emotions. I heard Sam splashing water under the shower. I
followed him to the bathroom, and then went to my bunk in the stern,
for I had given Xenora my stateroom. I was leaden with weariness, but
peacefully secure in the protection of the heavy metal walls of the
Omnimobile.

I have very little idea how long I slept, for we had let our watches
run down. In the absence of the sun, we came to pay less and less
attention to the time, though we usually kept the chronometers going.

When I woke I felt greatly refreshed, with my terrorized despair almost
gone. But I would not forget the sense of evil and intelligent power
that I had got from the pillar of strange green fire that had been
thrust so deliberately and purposefully up through the mist of violet
flame, and into the rosy haze that hung over the hidden abyss in which
it lurked.

It had _seen_ us! I knew it. And I knew that, even if its incredible
power seemed withdrawn, it was still not far away.

I heard Sam speak, heard Xenora laugh. Evidently they were in the
little galley, for I heard the clatter of cooking utensils. I dressed
and went in. How beautiful the girl was! Her red lips were brilliant
against the light green tan of her skin. Her dark hair fell over her
shoulders in a rich cascade, and her violet eyes were sparkling with
life.

She came to me quickly, and took my hand. No words passed between us,
for our minds were too near together to need many words. It was enough
for me to see the sympathy and love in her eyes. And it seemed again,
when our hands met, that a subtle current flowed back and forth between
us, setting our minds alight, making our hearts beat faster, raising us
together into a higher ethereal plane and fusing our beings into one!

In a moment Sam, with a kind smile of understanding on his face, called
us to the table. The steak from the thing we had killed was a great
success, and the table was loaded with the good things with which the
larder of the machine was stocked. The girl ate heartily, as did Sam
and I, and we talked and laughed a good deal. Even if the small number
of our common experiences limited the topics of conversation, we had a
merry enough time of it, and somehow that happy meal gave us greater
courage to meet the strange menace that rose before us.

After we had eaten, and all had helped wash the dishes, all in the same
gay spirit, Sam got out the box in which he had put the little creature
he had named Alexander. I had quite forgotten all about the diminutive
winged plant. With mingled curiosity and repulsion I watched him
unfasten the box. I had not yet recovered from my instinctive horror at
sight of the flying plants. Xenora seemed to share my antipathy toward
them. But Sam has always seemed to care as much for wild life as for
men; and he seemed to consider the little creature as natural a pet
as a dog. However, of course, his real reason for keeping it was for
scientific observation.

The thing fluttered about in the box when he picked it up, and as
soon as the lid was raised, it flew out and lit on his hand. Already
it seemed bigger and stronger than it had been a day before. The pale
yellow of the little fish-like body was darkening. The wings seemed a
darker green, and stronger. The blood-color of the slender tentacles
along the sides of the body was growing deeper and deeper.

The weird little monster clung to his finger with three of its
tentacles, holding the thin, petal-like membranes about its head
extended, and moving its black, knobbed organs restlessly. At first the
color of the flower-like tissues was almost white, but when I made a
sudden motion, they quickly darkened to a deep violet, and the little
creature crouched down in Sam's hand as if it were alarmed.

Sam smiled down at it with real understanding in his face.

He uncovered on the table a dish containing a great chunk of the raw,
bloody meat of the thing we had killed. The queer, flower-like head
twisted about, and the black, stalked organs moved like eyes. Abruptly
the membrane changed color again, from the violet of its fright to a
deep red.

Sam held his hand over the meat and the slender tentacles disengaged
themselves and writhed down over the plate like tiny red snakes. They
began to suck the juices out of the meat, and, as the thing filled
itself, the strange flower slowly faded in color, until it was a pale
pink.

Observing my instinctive horror of the thing, Sam said: "That's the way
it was meant to eat, Mel. Nothing unnatural about it. Our table manners
might not seem very elegant to an angel!"

"I guess you're right. But that thing just gets on my nerves."

When he went to put the little creature back in the box, it clung to
his finger as if reluctant to go, and strange bright patterns of color
flashed over the thin membrane. It seems fantastic enough, but even
then I was sure that the little thing possessed intelligence, and that
it was beginning to feel affection for Sam.

The next time he took it out it seemed larger and stronger--and
hungrier! We stayed there for what must have been ten days, though
we kept no accurate account of time. It grew rather astonishingly,
and always its odd appearance of intelligence was greater. It seemed
to feel a real affection for Sam. He whistled ancient tunes to it
sometimes, and it seemed to listen in great delight. And for long hours
he would sit with the thing in his lap and talk to it. He declared
that it was getting so that it could understand. Bright colors crawled
on the membranous fringe, and it seemed to listen to him with great
intentness.




                              CHAPTER XXI

                       Back to the Haunted Hill


On the morning--if one may speak of morning in that world of eternal
day--after we had slept off the fatigue of our visit to the hill where
we had seen the lights of terror, Sam took me aside for a short talk.

"Mel," he said, "we can't forget what we've come here for! My generator
is still keeping up the interference in the ether; but, sooner or
later, the force we have come to fight--and it must be that 'Lord of
Flame' of Xenora's, and the thing we saw from the hill--will break down
the interference! And then the earth--will freeze!"

"But what can we do against--that? And Xenora! Sam, I can't leave her.
She's worth more to me than the earth! There's plenty of room in here
for us to live our lives out. I've been thinking about it--and I can't
go!"

He nodded sympathetically. "I know, Mel. She means a lot to you. But
perhaps we will win and save our lives, too."

"Not a chance!" I said bitterly. "Not against that thing we saw! It
means death--or worse! But I suppose we have to go on and do our best!"

The old man was beaming. He patted me on the shoulder. "I knew you
would be with me, when you had time to think," he said. "Now, when the
life of the world is at issue, we can't consider ourselves."

"What do you think we can do?"

"What can't we do? We have the Omnimobile. We have machines and tools.
We have knowledge, and our hands. We can go anywhere, and do anything!
But the first thing is to study, to find out what we have to deal with,
and how to fight it."

"I suppose so."

"Mel, we must go back to that hill."

"No! no! Not there! It was only a miracle--and Xenora--that saved us
before!"

"I've some theories. We'll be better prepared next time."

A sudden thought struck me. "Say, couldn't we pay a flying visit to our
own world again, and tell what we've found? Then the world would still
have a chance, when we are--gone. A half-million Americans, with tanks
and heavy artillery, would look mighty good down here. And it would
just take a day or two to go."

"No," Sam said. "The world would hardly believe it all, even if we
carried out what evidence we could. And nothing could be done in time.
Then, I'm not sure we could get out. In fact, I'm pretty sure we
couldn't. The rockets might carry us three miles high, all right; but
we could never break through that water from beneath. We would fall
back. Mel, it's up to us!"

During the days that followed, Sam spent most of his hours in the
little laboratory. He spent much time on those great machines that
controlled his forces in the ether. And he invented and developed
another device that was more nearly within my understanding.

"You know, Mel," he said one day, "I think I can rig up something to
protect us from that--fear--that came so near getting us. Ever since
you made your telepathic contact with the Green Girl, I have had the
idea that the brain sets up disturbances in the ether. We know that
the action of the nervous system is electrical in nature, and all
electric discharges set up ether waves. It happened that you and she
had great minds, created in perfect synchronism, so that each was
sensitive to the vibrations of the other. Hypnotism is best explained
by such electric theories.

"Now, I am convinced that the 'Lord of Flame' is a brain--whether in
a human body or not I cannot attempt to say. It creates such powerful
etheric disturbances that it was able to affect us at a distance. If
that is the case, it ought to be a fairly simple matter to provide
insulation against its vibrations. You know that induction or electric
action cannot penetrate a conducting cage. I ought to be able to fix a
conducting helmet that will prevent the induction of neuronic currents
in our brains."

A short time after he showed me three helmets, as he called them. They
were little more than bags of wire gauze to be put over our heads. He
demonstrated that an electroscope draped with one of them remained
entirely unaffected by charges brought near it; but it seemed a
ridiculously inadequate protection against that terror.

We went hunting several times, for the benefit of the little plant.
After the first few days, Sam let it go along, hanging on his coat. It
was growing very fast, and developing remarkable characteristics. It
showed surprising intelligence. Sam seemed to have a real affection for
it, and it, in turn, seemed to love him.

I never ceased to feel the strangeness of those expeditions over the
rolling green grasslands, among the sparsely scattered flowering trees,
in the hot damp air and the intense red light. We shot two more animals
like the first, and three others of a smaller variety, which somewhat
resembled large rabbits.

Very shortly after Sam had perfected his electro-screen helmets,
he planned another expedition to the hill where we had so nearly
met incredible disaster. We carried a telescope, electrometers,
spectroscope, and a few pieces of Sam's recently developed and highly
complicated apparatus, which he had neglected to name, for detecting
and analyzing etheric waves.

Xenora insisted on going with us, and there seemed no reason for
leaving her behind, since Sam had perfect confidence in the efficacy of
his new helmets, and since the girl herself was an excellent woodsman,
and could undertake to keep us from getting lost.

We had a long hot march of it across the green plateau among the purple
trees, with the fierce beams of the crimson sky pouring down upon us.
Burdened with the heavy instruments, we were worn out when we reached
the summit. I had suggested that we come in the machine, but Sam wanted
to keep it out of the sight of the weird enemy we fought.

Once more we gazed across the vast valley of purple and green, to the
mists of ruby light over that abyss beyond the distant lake, in which
the violet beams still danced and pulsed. And hardly did we have our
apparatus set up when we saw that unearthly, serpent-like beam of green
fire writhe up out of the vale of mystery into the rosy haze!

We had on the insulating shields, and I felt nothing of the
inexplicable horror of the former occasion; though, of course, the
whole adventure was certainly terrible enough. But now that strange
thing of green seemed distant and devoid of menace. By way of
experiment, I ventured to raise my helmet. The terror caught me like a
cold and rushing torrent that swept me almost off my feet! I was glad
enough to get the wire gauze fastened back about my head again.

"It is the Lord of Flame," Xenora cried, "looking over toward the
city of my people, to see who will be taken to become his slaves.
This is a wonderful thing, Barsoni Sam, that lets us not feel its
power!"--Barsoni being a word that means 'great man,' in the tongue of
Lothar.

For many minutes the amazing shape of twisting green radiance hung
in the air. Sam was busy with his apparatus, squinting at the thing
through telescope and spectroscope, and reading his other devices. At
last the awful, throbbing thing faded away, and died into nothingness.
Only the violet lances were left in the mist.

"Many of my theories were substantiated," Sam informed me, almost
jubilant. "And I got a lot of new data! It is rather odd, but the light
from that thing shows the helium lines as luminous bands, not as the
dark lines that might be expected to rise from the absorption of the
helium in this atmosphere! I can hardly understand it!"

He said nothing more, but was sunk deep in thought as we quickly
gathered the instruments and hastened silently down the hill. I
felt that he had won a notable victory in the invention of the
thought-insulating helmets. We arrived at the machine again without
accident.




                             CHAPTER XXII

                           The Silver Sphere


For several days longer, Sam continued his labors in the laboratory.
During that time "Alexander," the flying plant, developed remarkably.
Before we moved, it had a wing-spread of two or three feet. I have
spoken of its intelligence. It soon learned to flutter to the guns when
we were preparing to hunt. Sam talked to it incessantly, and declared
that it could understand him. He said it could even make its thoughts
known by the varying pattern of colors on its fringe of brilliant
membrane. Presently he had it trained to dry dishes and to do other
similar tasks in the galley.

Of course the thing never learned to speak. In fact, it was devoid
of vocal organs, and incapable of making a sound, though its hearing
seemed to be good enough. It appeared to communicate its emotions and
thoughts by means of changes of color in the tissue-like membrane that
I have termed a flower. And, from a strictly scientific point of view,
communication by light, or sight, is quite as logical as communication
by sound.

Sam examined the black, rod-like organs projecting from the flower on
the thing, and said that each of them bore thousands of tiny eyes, like
the compound eyes of an insect.

After we had been in the vicinity for perhaps two weeks by upper
world time, we started the Omnimobile's great motors again, and moved
northward. I had not told Xenora about my talk with Sam--our minds
were too closely attuned to require much conversation. I knew that she
understood that our maneuver would probably mean our sacrifice to the
cause of the world. She said nothing of it, but I thought I detected a
sadness in her manner.

During all the hours that Sam had been in his laboratory, alone or
with Alexander, I had spent most of the time with Xenora. We wandered
together about the meadows, or sat in the cabin to escape the almost
intolerable heat. Always I loved her more, brimming as she was with
humor and sympathy and love. And bitterly I cursed the fate that was
dragging us both to our doom!

Even at the beginning, Sam's scientific achievements had been so far
above my understanding, that I would scarcely comprehend them, and his
later speculations regarding the menace of the abyss were so abstruse
that I quite failed to follow them. His little workshop forward was
crammed with strange machinery, some of it humming incessantly. Indeed,
his apparatus was still keeping up the interference that prevented the
freezing of the earth!

Sam had been signally unsuccessful in getting any scientific
information from Xenora, for the simple reason that she had none to
impart. But, from her geographical knowledge, he attempted to draw a
map, showing the locations of Lothar, of Mutron, and of the pit of the
Lord of Flame.

[Illustration: _The Map that Sam and Xenora Drew._]

It seemed that there was a strip a score of miles in width between the
farther blue walls of the abyss and the great lake we had seen. The pit
of Xath seemed to be a great crater lying in that strip. On the brink
of the crater Xenora located her "City of the Sleepers," or Mutron. The
domain of the last city of Lothar, where she had spent her childhood,
lay along the cliffs far to the west of there.

Our boldest plan of action would have been to hurl the machine, by
means of the rocket tubes, into the abyss in a direct attack on the
Lord of Flame; but Sam, for reasons he did not divulge, doubted the
success of such a maneuver. He wished to keep up his researches, and
possibly to visit the city of Lothar. His apparatus told him that
hidden forces were again stirring in the ether.

For ten hours we moved toward the north, making a long detour to
westward to keep within a valley, and always trying to take advantage
of such cover as was offered by the purple trees. The country was,
for the most part, rolling and green, with the great flowering trees
dotting the hills and plains but sparsely. The blazing radiation of the
eternal crimson day was undiminished, but the temperature fell slightly
with increased altitude.

Xenora and I were together at the cabin control-board, driving the
machine; and Sam was in the conning-tower, with the little gun, ready
for emergencies. When we had been moving for some ten hours, we mounted
a low, bare hill, and saw in the little green valley before us a
thicker forest of the bright purple trees, offering good cover for the
machine.

We had crossed the summit, and I had increased the speed to ten miles
per hour in haste to reach the trees, in spite of Sam's fear that the
operation of the motors at anything like full capacity would create a
disturbance in the ether that our hidden enemies would pick up.

Suddenly I saw a strange thing skimming along over the bright forest
before us--in our direction! It looked like a bright silver globe,
many feet in diameter! It floated a few hundred feet above the trees,
drifting smoothly along like a bright metal balloon in a very swift
wind. There was no visible propulsive mechanism.

I shouted a warning to Sam through the speaking tube, to stand by his
little gun.

Xenora laid a light hand on my shoulder and said, in a tense voice: "It
is the Sleepers of Mutron, the slaves of the Lord of Flame! They will
fight to death--they know not fear!"

As the silver sphere drifted swiftly and silently down upon us,
as though borne by an invisible wind, twice I caught a glimpse of
a slender ray of purple flame, that darted out of it and moved
searchingly over the bare greensward below. And then a rich purple beam
fell suddenly and intensely upon the Omnimobile!

When that misty finger of purple light discovered us, I saw a strange
vortex of pale green fire spring up about the globe and reach out in
our direction. Suddenly I realized that this ship was of the same
appearance as the weird thing that had destroyed our cottage! Small
hope, I thought, if that force of atomic disintegration were to be
released again!

I heard the rapid crashing of the machine gun, as Sam began to fire,
and presently bursts of smoke appeared about the gleaming sphere.
But to hit a relatively small and rapidly moving target even a mile
away is no mean feat of marksmanship. I drove rapidly for the purple
wood, but with little hope of getting there before the terrible red
disintegration had melted us away.

Suddenly I heard the drone of some of Sam's new machinery going into
action. He had mounted his switches and dials in the conning-tower,
so he could control it from where he stood. Vivid blue electric flame
quivered and flashed over the metal parts of the machine as his new
weapons went into play!

The floating globe of silver drifted nearer, and the misty vortex of
green fire about us grew more intense. A strange red glow stole over
the vegetation around us, and a solitary purple tree ahead burst into
crimson flame. Then the sparkling fingers of purple fire reached out at
us again from the sphere. I wondered vaguely why the strange force was
not acting upon us. I did not know, until it was all over, that Sam's
vacuum tubes had set up a repulsive screen in the ether, protecting us
from the electronic vortex!

Abruptly an intensely bright, blinding tongue of white flame leapt
toward the silver thing from the great platinum electrode on the nose
of the Omnimobile! Sam had turned loose his electric arc! The flame
struck the globe, impinging upon it like a jet of fire, converting it
into a ball of supernal light!

Then it fell! It plunged toward the forest in a gleaming curve! The
green vortex of the disintegrator ray was gone, and the purple fingers
shone no longer! The incandescent shell crashed out of sight beyond the
purple trees!




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                           The Green Slaves


Sam snapped off the arc as the silver ship fell, and the drumming of
the generators stopped. For a little time the world was very still.
Xenora stood tense and silent beside me. As I turned toward her, I
caught the slight perfume of her dark hair.

Indeed, the Green Girl was a beautiful being! The white flannels she
wore failed to conceal the delectable curves of her slight and boyish
figure. Her rich, red lips were parted slightly, in the unconscious
intensity of her outward gaze.

Abruptly she became conscious of my look, and turned to face me, with a
quick smile on her face. There was a radiant, joyous light in her eyes.
The soft green tint of her skin was obscured by the rich, warm flush of
her excitement, and she smiled with gladness.

Impulsively she reached her slender hand out to take mine. "You have
won, Melvin Dane!" her soft voice said. "The ship of Mutron is fallen!
We shall not be slaves of the Lord of Flame! We shall not die the
violet death in the pit of Xath!"

"I hope not, my Xenora," I said. "I hope----" and I stopped in a little
confusion. I was not really embarrassed, but I could not go on. Really,
talking to a princess like Xenora is quite a different thing from
making protestations of love to a being of one's dreams.

"What is it that you hope?" she said quickly, with an impish smile.

Sam saved me by coming in from the turret, begrimed with the smoke of
the little cannon. He was a wonderful man. He was still strong, erect,
and confident, despite the load of toil and hardship our adventure was
putting upon his seventy years. His white hair was tousled, and he was
cheerfully loading up his ancient pipe, as calmly as if he were in his
own kitchen in Florida.

"Looks like the arc did for 'em all right," he said briskly. "Suppose
we get over and take a look. We might pick up something new."

"Very well," I assented, and turned to start the motors. I could not
resist a grin at Xenora, who was still regarding me with a speculative
smile. She laughed back at me; then was suddenly serious.

"Be careful! The Sleepers of Mutron! They might be alive in the wreck!
As long as they breathe, the Lord of Flame rules them!"

I started the generators, and the Omnimobile rolled heavily down across
the green slope, and through the fringe of flaming purple trees. In a
few minutes we came upon the wreck of the silver car, a great tangle of
twisted wreckage, half fused by the electricity, and bent and torn by
the fall. It lay in the little open space, with a great tree splintered
and smoking under it, and the ground about empurpled with fallen
petals. The twisted metal plates gleamed brightly in the light of the
scarlet sky.

I stopped the Omnimobile, and we got out and approached the wrecked
machine. There was a vast mass of the débris. The globe must have been
forty feet in diameter. We spent several minutes in gazing at it from
different angles, and then Sam and I climbed into the tangle of bent
white plates and massive twisted girders.

The machinery had been too completely destroyed for us to be sure just
how it worked. But Sam thought that the shell had carried tanks of
water, the gravity of which had been negatived by the emanations from
tanks of the same luminous gas which supported the roof of waters,
lifting the ship. From the nature of the fragments of electrical
machinery we observed, it seemed that the horizontal propulsion was
attained by the ionization and repulsion of the helium atoms in the
air. The apparatus that had produced the atomic disintegration was too
badly wrecked to be identified.

Presently I came upon the body of a man, caught between two twisted
bars, and cut half in two. The body was naked. It had a greenish cast
that was darker by far than that of Xenora's fair skin. The physique,
and the size and shape of the head, showed a race of high intellectual
development.

The dead man had a metal frame clamped upon his back. It was twisted
and broken, and whatever had been fastened upon his body had been torn
away in the crash. And the corpse had upon its back the strange violet
stains that had been upon Xenora when we found her!

Presently Sam found another body. It had been half burned up by the
arc. It, too, had the metal frame upon it, and the thing the frame was
to hold was still clamped to it! The body bore, fastened to the back
with those cruel metal clamps, a six-sided bar of blue metal! It was
six inches in diameter and two feet long!

"This must be the thing Xenora calls a 'fire-crystal,'" Sam said,
"though I don't see any fire about it. It's damned queer!"

"Do you suppose there is machinery in the bar, that generates forces or
currents that move the man about like a puppet?"

"Might be. I don't know. The metal thing may be a receiver for the
occult force set up in the ether by the Lord of Flame--hypnotism by
radio, perhaps, or something of the kind."

"Anyhow, as you said, it's damned queer, like everything else we've
found here--excepting Xenora."

"Suppose we take the thing along, and open it up when we have time?"

He produced a pair of pliers, and we twisted the odd blue bar out of
its frame, and carried it to the machine. It was oddly light to be
metal, though it must have been an irksome burden to the one on which
it was fastened. We got aboard again, and moved for the cover of the
purple wood, for we did not know how soon relief would come for the
fallen ship. But Xenora assured us that the Lunaks, as she called the
flying things, quite frequently destroyed the ships of Mutron, and that
the fate of this one would be laid to them.




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                            The Blue Prism


For perhaps thirty miles we drove the great machine through the
brilliant forest, southward down a broad valley. At last we stopped
in a little grove of tall flowering trees, close by the cool crystal
stream. Beyond the grove was a little patch of green clearing with the
great purple trees closing in all about it. It was a peaceful spot,
weirdly beautiful, and it seemed secure enough. The unceasing wind
was not so hot beneath the great trees, and they shielded us from the
burning, crimson glare of the sky.

The Omnimobile seemed safely hidden beneath the masses of purple bloom;
and whenever we were tired, or thought ourselves in danger, we could
retire to the quiet security of its cool interior, behind the thick
metal walls. Frankly, I hoped that our stay there would be a long one.
I tried to forget the menace that hung over the earth.

Our life there was simple, and, for my part, I was supremely happy. Or
not quite supremely, for I could not quite still my conscience. I was
pretty well resigned to fate, however. With such a girl as Xenora, a
man might be supremely happy anywhere. We tramped together about the
grove, gathered the tiny, bright-red flowers in the green meadows,
and bathed in the cool dark pools, where the river flowed beneath the
purple trees. Sometimes she sang to me the folk-songs of her people,
monuments of the high estate that Lothar had once enjoyed.

What would it matter to me if the eternal death came again and forever
to the upper earth? What would it matter if the earth did freeze? I
forgot in the idyllic happiness of Xenora's companionship--or tried to
forget. If the roof of water were changed to ice it would only be more
secure! The maiden and I could live out our lives in this strange land,
without regard to the fate of the world. One of her matchless smiles,
or a note of her golden laughter, was worth more than all the earth!

Meanwhile, Sam was immersed in his laboratory work, in the examination
of the prism of blue metal, and in his curious pet. The plant creature
still grew with remarkable speed, and always showed most remarkable
intelligence. It was always with Sam, flapping along above him on broad
green wings, or walking awkwardly upon its thickening red tentacles.
Sam gazed at the flickering colors of the membranes about the head,
with the light of strange understanding in his eyes, making strange
gestures with his hands. Just to what extent they could communicate, I
never knew.

It always went with him, when he went to hunt for its meat. It was a
voracious eater, requiring a kill a day. The great sloth-like animals
were plentiful and sluggish; it was not difficult to stalk them. As
soon as it was strong enough, the plant creature learned to carry Sam's
rifle. Its extraordinary intelligence, or imitative instinct, is shown
by the fact that one day it fired the gun itself, when it was flying
with the weapon, and saw one of the sloths on the run.

It showed a very real affection for Sam. Once, when they were out
together, it saved his life. One of the tuskers had suddenly charged
him from behind, and the creature flew at it and attacked it madly with
its undeveloped claws. At the cost of considerable minor injury to
itself, it held the beast off until Sam could get in a shot. It always
showed an odd delight at his caresses, and seemed to take a peculiar
joy in the music of his old phonograph.

As I have said, it grew very quickly. At the time we stopped in the
wood, it was somewhat smaller than a hawk. Perhaps two months later
(time was rather meaningless to us during that one happy period of our
adventures in that world of unending day) the creature had grown so
large that once, in an apparently playful mood, it was able to lift Sam
and fly with him on a circuit of a hundred yards, bringing him back to
the machine and setting him down very softly. Then its armored brown
body was as large as a man, and the green wings were like sails.

That was near the end.

During all that period, Sam devoted much time to the examination of
that bar of strangely light, bright blue metal. He felt that in it he
might find a solution to the mystery of the Lord of Flame. I assisted
him as much as I could. The metal was evidently an alloy. Analysis
showed that it consisted largely of aluminum. There was a trace of a
heavy metal that we could not identify. And the bar was slightly, very
slightly, radioactive--perhaps, Sam thought, merely because it had been
exposed to intense radium emanations.

The density of the bar was only half that of aluminum. For some time
we could not understand that. Careful examination showed no break in
the surface; and presently we sawed it in two, and then in many pieces,
searching for the machinery that we half-expected to find. But, as far
as we could determine, the bar was absolutely homogeneous.

Then Sam thought of examining it under the microscope. He found that it
was full of microscopic bubbles--hollow places! By later experiment,
we found that the metal was just a sponge of the strange alloy,
filled with tiny bubbles of helium gas, under considerable pressure.
Sam presently formulated the theory that the alloy, when formed, had
contained considerable amounts of radium compounds; and that the alpha
particles, or charged helium atoms, thrown off by the disintegration
of the radium, while the metal was in a semi-plastic state, had been
imprisoned in it.

But it was not until later--much later--that we got the true meaning of
it--that we understood the insidious force that acted in the metal, to
make human beings slaves to it!

So the days went by--happy, carefree days for me. I knew real joy for
the first time in my life. Since youth I had known the Green Girl in my
fancy. I had longed to find her, with a restless, hopeless longing that
had left me discontented and unhappy, whatever my surroundings. Now, at
last, she was really mine. I loved her with a singleness and intensity
of affection that turned all my emotion in one direction, so I felt
little fear or care for anything else.

One day, when we sat like children together on a cool, moss-covered
rock beneath a great fragrant purple tree, with a crystal pool before
us, gleaming like molten ruby in the light of the scarlet sky, I told
her quite simply that I loved her--that I had known her always, and
loved her as long.

"The white chieftain of my dreams," she whispered, "for what long years
I have wished for you to come and tell me that!"

There was no need for further words between us. It was a long, long
time before we returned to the machine, and then I am afraid we both
flushed a little before the smile of tender understanding on Sam's lean
face.




                              CHAPTER XXV

                    The Tragedy in the Purple Wood


Our woodland life was happy. We were quite unconscious of the events
that were shaping themselves to bring sudden catastrophe. We saw in our
simple lives no foreshadowing of the supreme moments of the stupendous
drama in which we were involved. The crisis came with little enough
warning.

On the last day of our joyous existence there (we had fallen into
the habit of making an arbitrary division of our time into days and
nights), Sam arose and fixed our breakfast. I remember that we had
pancakes, with maple sirup. Then, since "Alexander" was fluttering
about, eager for the day's hunt, and flickering messages to him with
its petal-like membrane, he got his rifle and they departed.

As the old scientist walked off through the purple trees, puffing
steadily on the old pipe in his mouth, fondly watching the huge, winged
beast that flew along above him with his gun, little did I dream of
the tragedy that was in store! I could not have believed that Sam
stood in any great danger. The winged creature that attended him was
two-thirds grown; it would have been more than a match for a couple of
lions! Certainly it was no feeble bodyguard!

An hour after he had gone, Xenora and I took one of my old romances
of science, and walked a quarter of a mile up the limpid stream to a
favorite resort of ours. We laughed and talked much by the way, and
gathered a great bunch of the little red blooms. I was teaching her to
read--at least that was our nominal business, though it was usually
forgotten.

The living, wonderful mystery of her, her sheer perfection, the life
and love that sparkled in her eyes, all enchanted me, carried my
thoughts away from the page!

We sat together on our mossy stone seat, reading a little, and laughing
and talking much, until we forgot all except each other. When I looked
at my watch, I found that we had been there many hours. We got up and
started back to the machine, speculating light-heartedly on what Sam
would have ready for dinner.

We shouted carefree greetings as we approached the machine, and
received no reply. We got to the deck, and descended to the cabin in
vague alarm, but saw no sign of the old scientist. We hoped that he had
only been delayed. I blew the siren several times, and listened to hear
a signal from his gun. But when the echoes of the blast had died away
from the silent purple wood, all was still again. We heard no answering
shot.

I climbed out on the deck to listen. Not a sound disturbed the
stillness, save the faint rustle of the unceasing wind in the purple
trees above, and the crystal tinkle of the little stream. Green meadows
and bright trees lay steaming beneath the hot red sky--quiet as death.
The stillness was ominous. It bore the portent of doom!

Presently Xenora crept up by me and ran her strong cool arm through
mine. Her violet eyes were solemn, now; and her fair face was clouded
with anxiety. She had come to share my love for Sam.

"I am afraid for him," she whispered. "Many things might have happened.
The beasts he hunted may have charged and killed him. Or a ship of
Mutron may have found him--the ships of the Lord of Flame travel even
to the waters of the lower sea to do battle with the Lunaks. And there
is another danger of the wood--that is never seen. The hunters of
Lothar never venture far from the city."

Her words were not particularly encouraging, and I made ready to go
to look for Sam at once. I carried a heavy rifle, my pistol, and an
emergency medicine kit. Xenora insisted on going along, and I could do
nothing but assent. I did not wish to leave her alone, and she herself
was no mean woodsman. In fact, when it came to the matter of following
the trail over the low green plants, she proved far more expert than
myself.

We left at once. The trail led us east for a mile, parallel to the
stream, in the cover of the purple trees. Then it turned north across
an open meadow; and there Xenora picked up the spoor of one of the
great sloths, which Sam had stalked. It led on to a group of three
giant purple trees, and there we found two fired cartridges from Sam's
rifle. Three hundred yards farther on, in an open meadow, we found the
kill.

Alexander had evidently had his fill from it; and near by were the
dying embers of a fire, and the charred green stick on which Sam had
cooked a steak for himself. The ground around the fire was somewhat
torn up. The green plants had been uprooted and crushed. And there on
the ground I found another cartridge from the rifle.

Presently Xenora picked up a trail leading toward a clump of the
flowering trees to the north. We followed it hastily, silent with
fearful anticipations. Twice we saw on the ground great splashes of
green liquid, of the life-fluid of the plant creatures. Had Sam's pet
been fighting for him in the air as he fled?

Then we came to the pitiful end of the trail. The ground was
frightfully torn up, as if great bodies had struggled there. There were
great splotches of the green fluid, and a fateful stain--evidently of
human blood. Sam's battered pith helmet we found on the ground there,
and six fired shells--silent tokens of the battle!

From the spot no trail led away. There was no evidence to show whether
the battle had ended in death or in capture, nor anything to show
what manner of being the unknown assailant had been. For a long time
we stood there, gazing at the spot in lifeless grief and despair,
apathetically fingering the helmet and shells, vainly trying to picture
the contest, and looking about for other signs.

"It is no use to go farther," Xenora said at last. "It is the unknown
menace of the purple wood. Many a man of Lothar has been taken by
it--it is a silent, winged death!"




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                        The Last City of Lothar


Presently we turned and trudged wearily back to the Omnimobile. There
was nothing else to do. I was sick with an aching heart. It was
incredible that Sam, kind and true friend that he had always been,
should be no more. A choking lump rose in my throat, and I confess that
a few tears rolled down my cheek.

But I still had Xenora. As we walked, I put my arms around her,
protectingly, in the grim determination that this strange world should
not rob me also of the dream girl for whom I had searched two worlds.
My love of her kept me from utter despair, but even then I knew that
our ideal life could not go on.

I would have to find what it was that had taken Sam--to identify the
thing that Xenora called so vaguely "the menace of the purple wood."
Might it be the wild plant monsters, or was it something even more
alien and terrible? And I thought more seriously of the danger to the
earth, that I had been trying so vainly to forget. Sam's responsibility
had fallen on my shoulders. I must see what I could do.

With the wonderful intuitive knowledge of one another's thoughts that
Xenora and I have always had, she understood what was passing in my
mind before I said anything. Softly, she took my fingers in her hand,
and looked at me with deep sympathy in her eyes.

"I know, Melvin, what you think. And it is right. It is hard, so soon
after you have come here to find me--but it must be. I can guide you to
the city of my people. I can even show you to the brink of the pit of
Xath, if you would go there!"

"You are very brave and true, my princess!"

"I come from Lothar! If you feel that your duty bids you risk the
violet death in Xath, I would not dissuade you. But the Lord of Flame
is mighty--no man can fight him! He has power over all!"

"Except our love," I said. I stopped, and took her in my arms, and
pressed her red warm lips against my own. In the whole world, she was
all that was mine. She clung to me fiercely, as if the terrible power
of the pit of flames was trying to tear her away.

At last we went on, and presently we reached the Omnimobile, hidden
in the purple grove. In Sam's absence, it looked very cheerless and
lonely. We got aboard and made ready for departure. I tuned up the
motors, and examined the electric weapons, and cleaned and loaded the
little cannon again. As I worked, Xenora went in the galley and fixed
a lunch. We ate quickly, under the silent pall of bitter tragedy,
thinking of the smiling old man that should have been with us.

Then we climbed into the conning-tower, and I switched on the engines.
The humming of the generators rose again, and the great machine
lumbered clumsily out of the little wood, where it had been hidden for
so many happy days. For many hours we held a north-westward course over
the green plateaus and through the purple woodlands, with the light of
the crimson day shining through the ports.

Xenora stood by me and chose the route. For the last few miles we crept
along just east of a high, bare ridge of rocks. At last she bade me
stop the machine in a clump of trees at the foot of the hill. The last
city of Lothar, she said, lay but a mile beyond.

I took my binoculars and a rifle, and we left the machine and clambered
up a half mile to the top of the ridge. The girl led the way, slipping
cautiously through the rocks. At last she threw herself down behind a
fringe of the low green plants, and motioned me to crawl up beside her.

"Look," she whispered, "and see all that is left of Lothar, the proud
kingdom of my fathers, under the curse of the Lord of Flame!"

Indeed it was a scene of ruined grandeur that met my eyes. A little
valley, perhaps two miles wide, lay beyond the ridge on which we
were concealed. On the low hill beyond, standing out against the
crimson sky, was a massive ruined wall. Back of it rose the crumbling
desolate ruins of great towers and palaces of stone, covered with the
moss of centuries of decay--merely the bare bleached skull of a dead
civilization!

"It was in those fallen palaces of my fathers," Xenora whispered again,
"that I found the strange machine that brought me the first dream of
you."

I put up the glasses and made out the actual city outside the wall.
Certainly Lothar had fallen since its days of radio. There was a mere
straggling village of rude stone huts spread out on the valley floor,
below the colossal ruined metropolis. The few hundred buildings were
surrounded by a little cleared space, with the purple forest creeping
up to reclaim it forever. I made out a few children playing about the
trees, and a dozen ill-clad men working in the clearings. A few wreaths
of smoke curled up from the dwellings; the people had not yet lost the
art of fire!

And hanging silent and menacing in the air above the village was
the visible symbol of the alien power that had wrecked that ancient
civilization! A great, gleaming silver ball--a ship like the one we had
fought--hung motionless above the huts, with a quick purple beam from
it flickering frequently over them!

For a long time we lay there watching that desolate, pitiful scene, and
then Xenora touched my arms, and we slipped back down the ridge. She
was silent, with grief and despair in her eyes.

"See!" she whispered at last. "See! Lothar is dead! The Lord of Flame
has killed it! The men are poor struggling wretches; they could do
nothing even if the flame were gone! My father was the last king of
Lothar. His was a troubled reign, and he has been dead many hundred
sleeps!"

"Don't grieve so, my princess," I said. "There are still vast cities
above the waters, where men are powerful and wise, and where the sky
is blue and a white sun shines, and where there is a domain many times
larger than all this abyss!"

"Can we go there--ever?" she questioned eagerly.

"No. We can never leave this land, even if the Lord of Flame is killed.
The machine cannot break through the roof of water from below. And the
power of the Lord of Flame is coming to earth. Even now it may be a
dead and frozen world."

And drooping in the silence of dull despair, we reached the machine,
and drove quickly for the protection of the deeper wood.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                        Mutron of the Sleepers


For half a dozen hours we lumbered eastward through the forest. We
wallowed through swamps, and rolled over broad green meadows alight
with the crimson day, and broke through jungles bright with purple
bloom. At last we emerged on a narrow upland, with the great lake below
it. The black sheet of water, tinged with the red light of the sky,
stretched away for many miles to the eastward. Along its northern shore
we could see the low cliffs that divided it from the pit of Xath.

We stopped the machine, and looked for a long time across the black
lake to the north, and over the low cliffs to the ruby mist beyond,
alive with the dancing violet lights.

Then I turned to the rare girl beside me, who was watching me with
tears brimming in her violet eyes. The utter grief, the black despair
on her face half broke my resolution. I felt doubtful, weak, utterly
miserable, with pain stabbing at my heart like a thin steel blade.

"It is right. You must go," she whispered bravely.

I took her in my arms again. How wonderful and true she was! Struggling
so bravely to hold back her tears! More precious than ever in the final
parting! A single hour of the heaven of that embrace--embittered by the
knowledge that it would soon be ended!

Then, quickly, lest my resolution fail, I made ready for departure!
I stretched up a tent in a little grove above the lake, and stocked
it with a liberal assortment of supplies from our store-room. I gave
Xenora an automatic and a case of ammunition, and showed her how to use
the weapon. Here she was to stay, in the vain hope that I might return
a victor from the mad attack on the Lord of Flame.

For I had determined to enter the abyss. I knew that was what Sam would
have me do, rather than lose time in an attempt to learn his fate.
Xenora was eager to cast her lot with mine, but I would not hear of it.

A choking lump was in my throat as I staggered aboard the Omnimobile,
and closed the manhole with a trembling hand. I gave a final
heart-breaking glance to the splendid girl, majestic and erect, even in
her pain, standing desolate and alone by the tent. Then I turned on the
generators, and drove north along the lake shore.

I had the rude map that Sam had drawn from Xenora's knowledge. It
showed the pit of the Lord of Flame to be just north of the lake,
separated from it only by a surprisingly narrow wall of cliffs which,
the girl said, had been a highway of her fathers, though it was now
covered with jungle. And the city of Mutron was shown north of me, on
the brink of the pit of Xath.

Steadily I drove northward, in a daze of fevered pain. It seems an
eternity when I look back upon it, but it could not have been many
hours. Automatically I kept in the shelter of the purple trees. At
last I emerged on the edge of a great plateau, covered with the green
vegetation, many miles across. On the south and west, from whence I
had come, it was surrounded by purple trees--by the thick purple wood
in which I had halted. On the north the great cliffs towered up to the
sharp-edged scarlet roof, four miles above. It was strange to see the
blue walls cut off so abruptly by the red. The sky was like a red lake
seen inverted in a mirror. Those blue cliffs were hardly a dozen miles
away now--I had to bend back my head to see the sharp line where the
roof cut them off.

On the east side of that plateau, there was--nothing!

Beyond, lay the pit of Xath, with the faint ruby mist above it, filled
as always with the wavering reflections of violet flames. And a half
dozen miles before me, on the brink of that pit, stood--Mutron!

The City of the Sleepers!

A strange scene it was! A city of silver metal! Domes and towers and
pyramids of argent whiteness! Vast incredible machines! Huge and oddly
wrought structures! Titanic cubes and cylinders and cones! All of
gleaming silver! The city shone with a cold light. It was as weird, as
unearthly, as a dead city of the moon! It had the silent, ghostly gleam
of moonlight! It was wrapped in mystery, clad in frozen fear!

And the city was not idle. Those vast amazing machines were moving.
Silver globe-ships were drifting in silent haste above it! And ever and
anon, one of them dropped over the rim, into the pit of Xath, or one
floated unexpectedly up out of that abyss!

As I stood there in the Omnimobile, in the shadow of the last of the
purple trees, my heart grew sick again with doubt. What, indeed, could
I, with my puny machine, do against the great science that that city of
mystery represented? The men of one once mighty empire were now slaves
to it! What hope was there for me? Was not the human race, like the
bison or the dodo, about to fall before a superior power?

But there would be no turning back. I saw to it that all the machinery
was in order, and returned to the conning-tower. Before me was the
instrument board that controlled the electric arc and the rocket tubes,
as well as the machinery.

I started the hydrodyne generators at their full capacity, and then
threw the switch. As the half-million horse-power went through the
resistance coils, jets of super-heated steam roared out of the nozzles,
condensing in white rushing clouds. The terrific force of the jets
uprooted the purple trees, and the machine vibrated to the mighty
blast. I was hurled into the air. With a speed that swiftly increased
to many hundreds of miles per hour, I hurtled the broad plain, and over
the ghostly white city of silver--and into the abyss!

The plateau ended abruptly as if cut off with a knife. The crater fell
sheer away before me, stretching to the vast blue cliffs in the north,
and to the line of living purple and green that marked the beginning of
the eastward forests. Only a thin green line separated the abyss from
the lake on the south, which, in the reflected light of the scarlet
sky, horribly suggested a sea of blood, ready to flow into the pit.

Undoubtedly the crater was of volcanic origin. I could not determine
its depth, nor the state of its floor--it was filled with the thick
crimson mist. The wavering tongues of violet fire still flickered
through it, throbbing strangely, like the reflection of fires
below--hinting unpleasantly of alien life.

As the rich green plain vanished beneath me, and I sped high over that
busy strange white city and into the haze of the abyss, an odd feeling
of the wildness and the unfamiliar terror of the place stole over me
again. I was very thankful for the invention of Sam's, for the thin
helmet of wire gauze above my head!

Suddenly a great twisting bar of green fire writhed up, like a
serpent's head, from the nest of flames. It swung and coiled and
twisted through the rosy mists with a slow, deliberate motion, like an
incredible reptile of flame, raising its head, _looking, searching_!
Despite the helmet, great fear swept my brain like a hot flame!




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                           The Flaming Brain


Mighty winds whipped about me. The roaring jets of steam drove the
throbbing machine on over the rosy mists, and over the flickering
violet flames. And I fell--dropped into the hidden pit. Vividly I saw
the great writhing head of green rising above the fire-fog ahead, with
that in its waving, serpentine motion that told me that its eyes were
already upon me! I was certain that it was a living, sentient entity,
that it was intelligent!

Could my weapons avail against it?

I fell through the rosy clouds. The green and purple rim of the
abyss grew vague, and the blue cliffs in the north assumed a misty
indistinctness. The red mist shone until it seemed that I was swimming
in a fog of crimson fire.

And all the while the bright beautiful face of Xenora was before me.
The light of her clear violet eyes drove the strangeness and the fear
from my mind, leaving only my pain at leaving her. I drove the machine
mechanically, lost in a daze of grief.

For ages, it seemed, I shot forward through the haze. At last I made
out a bare floor of sand and rocks, pitted with circular craters. It
was a good thousand feet below, and still dim in the haze. I opened the
bow tubes, and the force of my fall was checked. In three minutes more,
the machine struck the earth, bow first. It tore a vast hole in the
sand, and rolled over twice, coming to rest on its side. Fortunately
it had been built to withstand such knocks; fortunately, too, I was
strapped in my cushioned seat.

I got the motors started and worked the machine to an upright position.
The crater floor was visible for half a mile about in all directions.
It was a dead, desolate waste of hard sand and twisted black volcanic
rocks. Further vision was cut off by the rosy mist that hung above the
floor.

Then I saw, far before me, a bright violet gleam through the crimson
mist! Indistinctly I saw a broad green shaft of pulsing fire rise from
it, to lose itself in the crimson sky! That intense violet light, from
which the flickering reflections came, and from which the green beam
reached up, I knew, must be the seat of the Lord of Flame!

I started the engines once more, and the machine rolled mightily
forward over the bare rocks, with a great clangor of metal upon stone,
forging ahead at last to meet the alien menace. It roared over bare
sandy flats, rounded great boulders, crashed into pits, crawled through
craters! Then, suddenly, that terrible green flame flared out toward
me! I knew that I had been discovered! Like a lance of green flame it
flashed through the red gloom above! Its motion was alert, surprised,
terrible!

I set the loading mechanism of the little gun to fire high explosive,
and put it in action, hurling shells in the direction of that violet
light. And still I drove swiftly on. The flashes of the explosions were
visible through the mist ahead, but the deep violet light still glowed.

I turned on the reserve power units, and the machine vibrated from
their throbbing drone. I threw another switch, and the deep purr of
the giant transformers filled the ship. The mighty white tongue of the
electric arc reached out ahead of me!

And the Omnimobile plunged on!

Two of the silver spheres--the ships of Mutron--appeared before me,
with the green vortexes of the atomic disintegration springing up about
them. The great arc brought them down in incandescent wreckage almost
as soon as they came in view!

The violet mist grew brighter, more distinct. I knew the shells were
bursting near it, and that the arc would reach it soon. The faithful
old machine lumbered rapidly on over the wild and twisted rocky
desert--a waste as terrible as the mountains of the moon!

In fact, that crater-pitted floor bore a curious resemblance to the
typical lunar landscape, and the forces that produced them must have
been similar.

Then the mist cleared, and I saw the form of the thing that gave the
violet light! It was scores of feet thick, and hundreds tall! It was
a vast smooth cylinder of violet fire! It shone like metal, which
was white hot and seen through violet glass! The color of it ran and
flickered on the surface! Violet sheets and bands crawled and flashed
upon it, and violet flame flowed away from it in many little tongues.
The thing was perfectly smooth and cylindrical, five hundred feet in
height--a Titanic "monolith" of metal!

Still the Omnimobile lumbered irresistibly onward. The little gun
crashed regularly, and the shells threw up the earth about that weird
cylinder half a mile ahead. And the great white flame of the arc was
playing far out toward it like the sword of the angel of death!

I saw a cluster of curious gleaming machines about the base of the
great cylinder. One of my shells must have struck them, for they
suddenly seemed to collapse and dissolve in a cloud of white smoke.

Abruptly a huge, terrible bar of green fire rose from the top of the
cylinder almost like an extension of it--it was like a beam of green
light from a vast searchlight. But it bent and twisted, as if it were
alive! It moved like a snake, writhed toward me!

And then came the catastrophe!

A great pit in the rocky desert suddenly appeared before me--a
hundred-foot chasm! I made a wild attempt to swing the machine around
it. But, busy with the arc, the generators, and the gun, I had seen it
too late. The brink loomed before me! Desperately I set the brakes.
The machine paused jerkily, hesitated, then leaped over the rim! For a
breathless second it fell down the sheer crater wall! I had no time to
use the rockets! It crashed heavily upon the rocks!

I was torn from my seat and flung cruelly against the side of the
conning-tower! My helmet was knocked off! And on the instant, a red
storm of fear broke about me! It beat down on my brain like a rain of
horror! It throbbed with an archaic rhythm, stirring strange emotions
that overruled my reason and volition! Terror swept about me like a
fierce wind from a hot desert of death, picking up my soul and sweeping
it away to a fate unnamable!

I struggled with it terribly, with all my will. But it beat down my
feeble barriers like a resistless tide. It burned away my will like a
hot flame in my brain!

That horror came over me in a vast, overwhelming wave! It seized my
body! My hand moved unwillingly, and cut off the current of the great
arc! And then my body was struggling to its feet, opening the manhole,
and clambering out of the machine. But still the thing did not have
_me_! I was still an independent entity, that sat apart and watched.

I knew that I had succumbed to the hypnotic control of the alien power
that dwelt in that vast metal cylinder. I was another of the slaves of
the Lord of Flame--of the Sleepers of Mutron!




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                          Xenora's Sacrifice


I was moved out of the machine like an automaton by the terrible force
that controlled me. My body was no longer my own! It was swept along
as if by a mighty wind. That force of horror roared and throbbed in
my brain. Red flames of fear flickered before my eyes. I was sick and
faint with terror. But my body did not collapse--it was relentlessly
moved by that terrible force from the violet cylinder. I was utterly
helpless--I felt the hopeless horror of one chained before a loathsome
monster!

Suddenly I wished fiercely for death, for only death could bring me
freedom from the horror that swept in a throbbing torrent through my
brain. But even death was beyond my reach, for my hands were not my own!

For a moment that power left me standing on the side of the overturned
machine. The Omnimobile lay on the sandy floor of the crater, which may
have been a hundred feet in depth and as many yards across. Against the
red sky, above the black cliffs of the pit's farther rim, towered the
violet metal cylinder--the flaming metal brain whose hypnotic control
ruled my body.

For a moment I was left standing there, and then my body was springing
down and running across the rock-strewn sand toward the cliffs. It ran
like a machine--beyond my control! In vain I tried even to stumble and
fall! In a few moments it reached the rim. It clambered wildly up. I
know that in my normal self I could never have surmounted that sheer
wall. But the telepathic force from the flaming brain seemed to give my
limbs superhuman strength! Soon I was at the top, with bleeding hands
and tattered clothing!

And my body ran on toward the violet monostyle!

It was two hundred yards away--a Titanic smooth upright cylinder of
metal, the polished surface crawling and flowing with violet flame,
with the great incredible serpent-like beam of green rising from the
top.

It was astounding--in the strangeness of its aspect, and in its
inexplicable suggestion of alien intelligence! But how could there be
intelligence in metal?

And then I saw the men about it!

Two of the vast silver spheres were stopped on the ground below the
cylinder, oddly dwarfed by its vast height. And about them were men!
They were the green slaves--the Sleepers of Mutron! Their bodies were
naked but for tattered scraps of cloth. Fastened upon their backs by
the cruel metal clamps, they bore the strange prisms!

But those bars of metal were not blue like the one we had taken from
the dead man! They shone with the same mysterious violet radiance as
the Titanic monostyle. They were parts of it--akin to it!

The men moved like sleepers, or like machines, as I felt that I was
moving--as if their wills were dead! They toiled in tireless haste,
without confusion. Many were carrying burdens. And it seemed that some
were polishing the surface of the cylinder, or applying some luminous
substance to it. Near the ground they were quite plainly visible,
clinging to its surface like flies, and toiling furiously. Higher up
on the colossal cylinder they were but dancing black specks within the
violet flame!

The ground about was pitted with shell holes from my bombardment, and
at one side I saw the twisted wreck of the great machine I had struck.
It is possible that I had hit the great cylinder itself, but it might
have received the fire of the biggest gun in Christendom with little
injury.

In two minutes more I had been drawn to within fifty yards of that vast
shining column of metal. Then the force of fear that had seized my body
permitted it to stop, and I stood still. That awful twisting beam of
green flame reached out of the top of the thing, and bent down over me!
It touched me!

[Illustration: _That awful twisting beam of green flame reached out of
the top of the thing and bent down over me! It touched me!_]

I felt tiny whip-like fingers of it feeling--exploring my body! The
green radiance grew denser about me. It enshrouded me in a fog of green
light--so painfully intense, blinding and terrible, that I tried to
shut my eyes against it. But that horror held them open!

And that green fire came into my body, and into my brain. It was eager,
insistent, questioning--and so horrible that my being rocked with
pain. It questioned; it commanded! It sought to know of me, and of my
companions, of the Omnimobile, and of the world we had left above.
I struggled against it, fiercely, terribly, until I felt my limbs
chilling with the sweat of the conflict. But it won!

It took my mind as it had taken my body! It beat about my brain like
a vast storm; it penetrated my being in a flood of green fire! My
brain reeled, was swept by an avalanche of awful power! I sank at last
into merciful oblivion that was the counterpart of the death I had so
desired!

At last, when I was vaguely conscious again, I had a curious feeling
of mental exhaustion. I felt as if I had undergone a fearful ordeal. I
felt as if I had toiled as I slept, as if I had answered many questions
put to me by that power. It seemed as if the green light had swept the
contents from my brain, had searched all my knowledge.

As I awoke, bodily sensation returned, and I felt someone lifting
me gently from the bare earth upon which I lay: My limbs were cold
and stiff; but the awful force that had controlled them was, for the
moment, relaxed.

I opened my eyes, and cried out, first in incredulous joy, and then in
utter despair. Xenora--the Green Girl--was lifting my head. There was
anxiety and care in her violet eyes, and unutterable fatigue was shown
in her body. She had followed me into the pit, to give her life with
mine!

"Oh, Xenora, my dream girl, why did you come? There was no need for you
to give your life!" I protested in bitter despair as she raised me in
her arms and held me against her breath.

"I felt you battle with the Lord of Flame. I felt it conquer you. So I
left the camp, to come."

"And how, in all wonders, did you get into this pit, and so soon?"

"My chieftain, it is not so soon! For three sleeps I have come through
the forests and rocks, without stopping, while you lay still in the
power of the Flame!"

"But why--why--come to throw away your life--"

"See, I bring you the wonderful thing of Barsoni Sam, that shuts out
the horror. I give it to you, and you can go on with your battle
against the Flame!--No, you can never conquer the Flame! But fly! Go
back to your land!"

Even then I felt the horror awakening again, felt that fearful force
directed again upon me. With a single quick motion, before I could
prevent her, Xenora had whipped the electro-screen helmet from her head
and drawn it about my own.

"Fly," she whispered fiercely. "The Sleepers of Mutron! And think not
of me! Fly! Even from me!"

The horror relaxed, and I collapsed in a daze of relief. In a moment
I had recovered and got to my feet. Xenora was a score of yards away,
dashing off. I ran after her, calling for her to take back the precious
helmet.

Suddenly she stopped. A convulsion ran through her frame. She turned,
with her face a mask of livid horror. She was in the power of the
Flame! She was a Sleeper! She bent, seized a rock, and hurled it at my
head with superhuman strength. I dodged and it hurtled past my ear. She
sprang at me like an animal, drawing the hunting knife I had left her.

I turned and ran wildly, as a score of the Sleepers came running. I
passed close by that violet metal monostyle, and it seemed that its
crawling violet fires reached out for me. I ran desperately toward the
east! I heard the strange cries of the Sleepers of Mutron behind me!
I felt the awful green flame writhing above me, but even it could not
penetrate the helmet!

I was insane with terror!

I ran on and on, through eternities of heart-breaking effort. At last
I stopped exhausted, with pounding temples and bursting lungs, to look
behind me. The flaming brain was but a dull violet glow against the red
sky. A desolate waste of bare rugged rocks and great round craters
lay about me beneath the crimson mist. All was silent! The sounds of
pursuit were gone!




                              CHAPTER XXX

                       "The Nitrate Plantation"


Should I go on, or return and try to save Xenora, as she had rescued
me? That question throbbed in my brain. The answer would have been easy
enough if I had had her alone to consider. I might cheerfully have
surrendered myself to that dreaded power to save her--any man would
have done as much! But what of the menace to the earth? Should I give
up the struggle?

For a long time I stood there on the rim of a strange crater, lost
in indecision. At last my sense of duty to mankind was victor. I set
off wearily toward the east again. The Omnimobile was so near the
flaming brain that I dared not attempt to reach it, even if I had been
confident of finding it. And upon consideration, I was sure that if the
machine was left as it was, it would be only as a trap for me.

A sorry hope, indeed, was I for victory in the struggle with that vast
alien power for the safety of earth! A man alone, ragged, without
even a pocket-knife, lost in the wilderness of a strange world, and
possessing only a modicum of scientific knowledge!

What folly, indeed, for one in such circumstances to pit himself
against such a science! But that seemed the only hope for victory. With
Sam in my place, the outlook would have been brighter. If I had a fair
scientific education, Sam knew enough to raise cities and armies in the
wilderness!

For many hours I struggled toward the east--away from the violet
glow--over the desert of rocks and craters, through the ruby mist. And
I came unexpectedly upon an explanation for the origin of the crimson
haze. Thin clouds of red luminous gas were hissing from some of the
craters or fumaroles--escaping from the radium deposits in the core of
the earth, to float up and augment the radioactive cloud that held up
the waters!

I was half dead with weariness when I reached the mile-high cliffs
at the crater's rim, and half insane with grief for Xenora, and with
angry doubt of my wisdom in deserting her. I have little memory of how
I got up that wall of rocks. I remember climbing until I was worn out,
of toiling upward with bleeding hands and feet, of fighting on when I
was dizzy for want of food and water, of struggling up when my body
screamed in pain for me to surrender and drop to merciful oblivion in
the abyss! I remember sleeping many times on ledges or in crevices when
I could go no farther.

But at last I reached the rim!

I climbed out upon the flat plateau to the east of the abyss, a strange
wilderness of green plains and purple trees, but infinitely welcome
after the tortures through which I had been. I stumbled across the
meadows until I found a little stream. Eagerly I wet my parched mouth,
and presently I slaked my thirst, and ate a few of the date-like fruits
of the flowering trees. And then I slept.

For a period of many months thereafter, I led a strange wild life--the
life of a beast or a savage. It now seems to me that I must have been
more than half insane, yet I had cunning of a sort. Wandering about
in the woodland in the first few days, before my strength was fully
recovered, I came upon a great lump of native copper. With hammer and
anvil of stone I set out to shape some tools of it. First I made a
knife, and then a broad blade for a wooden spear. With those weapons I
soon had stalked and killed one of the great fat sloths. After several
weary efforts, I achieved a fire by friction, and feasted upon roasted
meat.

Many were the mad and impossible schemes that my fevered brain formed
for making an attack on the flaming brain of metal, only to reject each
upon consideration. As I had hurtled through the air above the pit,
in my ill-starred attack in the Omnimobile, I had been much impressed
by the narrowness of the bridge of cliffs between the great lake and
the abyss. Now it occurred to me that I might dig a canal, and let the
waters of the lake in to flood the Lord of Flame.

With that in mind, I made an expedition to the isthmus, armed with
copper pick and spade. I found that my eyes had curiously deceived me,
from the air. The land bridge was a wall of rock, nowhere less than a
hundred feet high and four hundred thick, covered with a rank growth of
jungle. Along it, even as Xenora had said, was a ruined road. Here and
there a crumbling stone monument rose from the jungle like a bleached
skull of the dead civilization.

There was no hope of digging a canal. A hundred men, in ten years,
might have been able to cut a tunnel through that wall of stone, with
modern tools and explosives! Nitroglycerine! That started me on a
new line of thought. I had once made chemistry a hobby. It was not
impossible. For Sam, it would have been child's play. But, alas! there
was no help from my old friend!

I set to work at once. For many months I labored. The task was a
tremendous one. The first necessity was an adequate supply of nitrates.
I was not fortunate enough to discover a natural deposit, as heroes of
fiction usually are; so I set out to make a "nitrate plantation" such
as is used for the manufacture of nitrates in a primitive way. I dug a
great shallow pit, lined it with waterproof clay, and filled it with
alternate layers of wood ashes obtained by burning the purple trees,
and everything I could pick up in the way of nitrogenous animal and
vegetable refuse. At last it was filled and wet down with water from
my clay-bed. I had nothing to do but wait until the nitrogen products
of decomposition had united themselves with the potassium bases in the
wood ashes.

Then I fell to the mining of iron pyrites, and to the building of
a furnace in which I could burn my pottery apparatus. After many
disheartening failures I was able to set up apparatus that I thought
would suffice for the manufacture of my acids. I burned rude jars,
glazed with sand, in which to carry and store my reagents and
explosives.

My memory of all that time is a dim dream of terror. Many times for
long hours I stood on the brink, gazing into the flickering mist,
thinking of Xenora and half determined to give it all up and to seek
her. But always I went back to my mad task, toiling in a daze of grief
and despair.

Before I did anything more in the way of manufacture, I paid another
visit to the isthmus, and selected the site for the mine which was to
tear an opening in it. I found a deep crevice in the rocks, and spent
many weeks in clearing and enlarging it, until I had ready a chamber
deep in the heart of the barrier, below the level of the lake.

During all that time I lived upon the little fruits and upon the flesh
of the sloths I killed. I carefully saved the fat from the latter,
saponified it with alkalies leached from wood ashes, and removed the
soap by "salting down" with evaporated brine from a salt spring. I
collected and stored the glycerine until I had many gallons.

At last, judging that my "nitrate plantation" had had time to serve
its purpose, I dug it up, leached the product, and crystallized the
saltpeter by evaporation in earthen pots. The yield was satisfactory in
quantity and fair in quality, but it had cost fearful effort.

Then I set about the manufacture of sulphuric acid by roasting the iron
pyrites with nitrate in my crude apparatus, collecting the acid in wet
pottery condensers. That took many days, and the next step was making
nitric acid by boiling saltpeter in sulphuric acid and condensing the
fumes.

At last, when I had the three necessary chemicals--glycerine, and
nitric and sulphuric acids--I set out to transport them separately to
my mine, to avoid the hazard of the transportation of the finished
product. That, again, was a heart-breaking task, for I had materials
enough to make several hundred quarts of nitroglycerine, and the
distance was half a dozen miles.

But ragged, ill-kept savage that I was, I had collected on the cliffs
above my shaft the materials for the manufacture of a good quantity
of high explosive. For one in my position, it had been a considerable
achievement.




                             CHAPTER XXXI

                         The Mine on the Brink


At last, in haste and fear and trembling, I began the task of mixing my
chemicals, dumping them into vats of water cooled by evaporation, under
a rude shed to cut off the fierce heat of the red sky. Even with all my
precautions to prevent a premature explosion, the hazard was fearful. I
washed the nitroglycerine, and carried it in earthen jars down into the
heart of the cliffs. I meant to die in the final explosion, but I was
afraid the stuff would go off before it was in place.

But finally I got the last of the rough jars into position. Then I
closed the mouth of the chamber with rocks and rubbish, to be sure that
the full force of the explosion would be exerted upon the cliff. I
lit the fuse I had prepared--a tall candle of the sloth's fat, which,
burning low, would ignite a powder train; and that would set off a
charge of gunpowder I had placed by the jars of nitroglycerine.

I knew that, if my terrible months of toil had not been in vain, a few
hours more would see a raging torrent of water rushing into the pit.
At last I judged my task completed. I walked a few yards north to the
rim. I stood on the brink of that sheer precipice, and gazed down into
the rosy mist, alight, as always, with the wavering, reflected fires
of the metal brain. I made no attempt to get beyond the range of the
explosion. Hope was dead. Life meant no more to me. I was ready to be
swept into the abyss on the crest of the wave that, if my plans went
well, would drown the flaming brain.

For a long time I stood there waiting, lost in dreams of Xenora. I
had no doubt that she was dead. My regret was bitter; I stormed vainly
and passionately at fate. If my reason had been tottering, now it was
almost gone. I wept, and cursed, and then laughed loud and bitterly. A
strange figure I must have been, wild and unkempt, red and burned from
exposure, half naked, with insanity in my eyes, laughing and waiting to
be blown to my doom!

And then I heard a sound that brought me into silent and cunning
alertness! I sprang to the mouth of my shaft and crouched like a savage
with my great copper-bladed spear at hand. I heard a stone rattling
and crashing down into the abyss! Someone--or something--was climbing
up out of the pit! I crept forward where I could see, and lay tense
and silent, a desperate madman, determined to protect my mine against
whatever might find it.

At last a human figure clambered up over the brink, and drew itself
erect in the edge of the jungle! It was a Sleeper of Mutron! The
emaciated form was bent beneath the weight of the bar of gleaming
violet metal clamped upon its back. It was clad in tattered, bloody
rags. The flesh was bleeding from the fearful climb.

With the dull, mechanical motions of a sleeping person, or of a walking
corpse, galvanized by some weird power, that terrible figure got
deliberately to its feet. The bloody hands raised a long, glittering
weapon of silver metal. And it plodded dully, lifelessly, toward me.
And then a hoarse, wild cry echoed through the silent jungle--my own
scream!

The Sleeper was Xenora!

With her old intuition of my thoughts, she had been able to penetrate
my helmet! Through her, the Lord of Flame had read my thoughts of
victory! She had been sent to prevent the mine's explosion, to snuff
out that candle flame!

If she heard my scream, she paid no heed. She walked on toward me,
with the same weary, mechanical gait. There was no light, no life in
her eyes. They stared straight ahead, dully, unseeing! And the strange
silver tube was held ready in her hand. She was more like a moving
corpse--a dead avenger--than a living person!

A mad storm of desires arose in my brain. How I longed to spring up,
to take that dear body in my arms, to minister to its hurts, to have
the Green Girl for my own again! It took all my will to hold me in my
hiding place. But this was not Xenora! It was a Sleeper of Mutron, a
slave of the Lord of Flame!

It was a fearful choice before me! But my resolution held! I would
carry on if it tore out my heart. With a burning pain in my breast, I
ran my fingers over the jagged copper blade, and tensed my muscles for
a spring!

Perhaps, after all, we would be better dead.

My madness was gone, but cold, grim determination remained. I knew that
I would not hesitate. The silent, sleeping figure of the Green Girl was
but a dozen yards from me, and I raised my ragged blade!

Then--a shadow upon the crimson sky! A whisper that grew to a mighty
roar! The beat of many wings! A strange and ringing cry from the
air above! A shouted, imperative, strange-toned command! Sam's
well-remembered voice! A rushing sweep of vast green wings before my
eyes! A tempest of wind as they beat the air! Xenora snatched up and
out of my sight by great red tentacles!

I was petrified in incredulous amazement. It seemed impossible that Sam
should be alive. Yet, there had been no definite proof of his death.
And, I thought, it must have been Alexander that carried him, and that
had swept up Xenora.

In a moment I had aroused myself, and dashed out of my hiding place
beneath the purple trees. It was an amazing sight that met my eyes.
There were numberless thousands of the flying plants on the wing above!
The red sky was flecked with their green wings! In a strange semblance
to military order they flew, like fleets of battle-planes. In scores
and hundreds they dived and circled, in perfect formation. Many of
them, I saw, carried weapons--vast clubs, or huge metal-tipped spears,
or heavy stones and masses of metal.

[Illustration: _In a strange semblance to military order they flew,
like fleets of battle-planes.... Many of them, I saw, carried
weapons.... And then a flight of them swept downward again, and I saw
Sam, mounted on one...._]

And then a flight of them swept downward again, and I saw Sam, mounted
on one that must have been Alexander--though the things all looked
alike to me. He was evidently controlling the whole squadron with his
shouts and gestures. The old scientist still seemed strong and able.

Then I saw Xenora. She was still in the clutch of the winged steed of
Sam's. Even as I looked, the red tentacles tore off the flaming violet
prism and hurled it into the abyss.

The weird, amazing creature dived. An incredible thing it was, with
its armored brown body as large as a shark's, with the vast flower of
the flowing colors about its head, with red tentacles like those of a
gigantic scarlet octopus, and with wings like those of a green airplane!

It bore down upon me! A great crimson tentacle reached down and picked
me up! I was swept through the air, held lightly in that strange grasp,
and lifted until I was face to face with Sam, who sat astride the
creature! He reached out his strong brown hand and grasped my own.

"Mel, old man, it's some luck to find you! And what do you think of
my army? A couple of the flying dragons captured Alec and me, so I've
been making the best of a bad situation. The things are really quite
intelligent, and I've been drilling them for months. They're hereditary
enemies of the alien civilization, anyhow. There's going to be some
fight when we meet the silver ships!" Exultant, joyous triumph rang in
his tones. He had not noticed my strange condition.

At last I was sufficiently recovered to speak. "I've got a ton of
nitroglycerine in that rock," I stammered. "The lake will be running in
the pit in an hour or so." My voice had a curious rusty sound.

"Nitroglycerine! You've been making it, and planting a mine! No wonder
you look like a ghost! And how comes Xenora to have that damned metal
bar on her?"

Abruptly I broke down into uncontrollable tears of relief and joy.
I did not try to answer. In a few minutes the vast army of winged
monsters had wheeled about, and was headed north again, over the
crimson mists--line after regular line of beating green wings that bore
the strangest army of history to the strangest battle ever fought!

But, at the moment, I was paying little attention, for I was mounted on
another of those vast flying creatures; and in my arms was Xenora! She
was limp, unconscious, sleeping the sleep of utter exhaustion. But she
was free again from the Lord of Flame! With tears of joy streaming down
my face, I tried to dress her bleeding hands and feet.




                             CHAPTER XXXII

                        When the Red Roof Fell


Abruptly a green light ran through the rosy haze beneath us, and
that dreadful twisting bar of radiance--that living, alien tongue of
fire--the serpent-like head of the Lord of Flame, was thrust up out of
the flickering violet! With its strange, writhing motion, it swept in a
wide arc, as though it saw us! It searched the sky, and then drew back
in alarm! The terrible, rhythmic throb of the emerald gleam in it grew
faster!

And quickly the crimson sky ahead of our flying army of green-winged
monsters was filled with fleets of the silver spheres! They rose
swiftly, by the hundred, in long, gleaming lines--floating, drifting,
darting, as though carried in swift, cyclonic winds. And then in
smoothly sailing squadrons they advanced to meet us, with the swirling
green mists of the disintegration force reaching out before them!

The aerial battle-lines met! The winged monsters joined in mad conflict
with the silver ships! It was a fierce struggle--a terrible scene! The
plant-things swept to the attack, scores in number for each great ship.
With desperate, incredible energy they wielded their gigantic clubs
and spears; or, wheeling high above the silver vessels, dropped their
missiles down upon them.

And the swift searching fingers of purple flame reached out of
the silver ships, to guide the thick, swirling vortexes of atomic
disintegration. Under that terrible force of flowing green, the plant
creatures turned red, battled on for a moment as they glowed with an
awful scarlet radiance, and fell in a rain of crimson sparks that fast
faded into nothingness!

And ever the throbbing emerald column rising above the sea of ruby mist
below us--the writhing serpentine bar of green that was the Lord of
Flame--moved and twisted, directing its armies!

The plants battled with desperate ferocity, with incredible strength!
In ones and twos and threes, the silver vessels fell, in twisted,
battered wreckage--fell among the showers of sparks from the vanished
creatures that had crushed them!

It was a battle of animal strength and courage, of desperate, savage
energy--against deliberate, inhuman science! It was the battle of the
mad, elemental beast--against silent, pitiless power!

And the plants won!

As the monsters that carried Sam and Xenora and myself swept along high
above the line of battle, we saw the silver ships give way, saw them
drop into the red mist, with the avenging, victorious plants following
close upon them!

And then my mine went off!

A vast white cloud of smoke and shattered rock rose deliberately above
the cliffs, spread into a Titanic mushroom shape, and fell in a great
rain of débris into the abyss and into the lake. After many seconds the
sound of it reached us--a crashing, deafening blast! The great wave of
air swept up the green-winged fleet like leaves on a stormy lake!

Below the cloud of smoke, where the black cliffs had been, I saw a vast
white sheet of waters--a rushing Niagara multiplied manifold--plunging
over the brink in a sheer and gleaming arc!

Even as I gazed at it, in dazed wonder at the thing I had wrought, Sam
was suddenly close beside me, shouting something with alarm and urgent
command in his voice.

"Mel--the roof! Where is the Omnimobile? For God's sake----"

"In a crater in the abyss, by the metal cylinder," I cried, wondering.

Then I looked up, and saw that the flat roof was cupping up, like a
vast inverted basin! The waters above were rising!

With no further word to me, Sam shouted a strange order to the monsters
we rode. Their vast green wings were folded! We dropped like plummets
into the crimson mist! The violet gleam appeared, and we made out the
crater-pitted floor. I shouted directions, and in a few minutes we
settled into the same little crater in which I had met disaster.

The Omnimobile was still lying there, just as I had left it!

The creatures that bore us dropped near the ground. Those great red
tentacles set us gently down on the rocks by the machine. Sam led the
way and I carried Xenora. Desperately we scrambled aboard and screwed
down the manhole. Sam's mount, Alexander, slumped into a curious
attitude of dejection.

Suddenly one of the silver vessels shot into view above the crater's
rim, drifting swiftly towards us! The machine was watched! It had been
left as a trap! The thing flashing beams of purple flame reached out
eagerly--found the Omnimobile. The whirling spirals of thick green mist
extended toward us!

Sam fumbled with the dials and made a hopeless gesture. Then I saw
Alexander spring into the air and fly toward the terrible gleaming
thing! With mad, desperate speed, the plant creature dashed straight
into that fearful swirling mist! It charged on through it! Already
glowing red with the disintegration beam, it struck the white machine
with terrific force!

The argent globe paused, hung uncertainly, and then fell with swift
acceleration until it crashed upon the walls of the pit, with the
gleaming, wasting form of the heroic plant still clinging to it in the
agony of a fearful doom!

For a long moment Sam was still. Suddenly he aroused himself as if from
a daze of pain, and turned again to the instrument boards.

"The earth is not frozen!" he shouted. "The power in the ether is
dead!" I thought of the havoc my cannon fire had wrought with the
machines about the flaming brain.

In a moment he had the generators going, and the machine crawling to
an upright position. Then he turned on the rocket tubes. The crater
was filled with the roaring jets of steam, and we were hurled into the
crimson sky!

I had a fleeting glimpse of the metal brain--the vast cylinder of
violet--with the green beam still throbbing from it, and with the last
of the silver ships battling the victorious army of plants that swarmed
about it!

"The roof is lifting!" Sam cried. "The equilibrium was very
delicate--the gas that kept issuing from the earth was lifting the
waters to the danger point, and your explosion carried them past! The
attempt to freeze the earth was probably undertaken because a roof of
ice would have been more secure!"

His voice was drowned in a fresh rushing, whistling burst from the
rocket tubes. I carried the inert form of Xenora down to the cabin, and
did my best to care for her. In a few moments we were above the haze. I
took a last glimpse of the green and purple forests dropping away below
us, and turned again to the unconscious girl.

Soon the fierce red glare that poured in the ports told me that we had
reached the red roof. And suddenly the Omnimobile was pitching and
spinning madly, with wild waters thundering against her sides. A sound
reached my ears--a roar, dull, distant and slumberous at first, but
rising to a crashing, deafening storm of sound! It seemed an eternity
that I held the sleeping girl upon the tossing couch, while the very
heavens rocked with thunder!

Abruptly, the bloody glare grew lighter, and was streaked with shafts
of bright sunshine--white, precious sunlight of the upper earth! We had
followed the vast bubble of gas through the roof of waters! The red
mists cleared--drew up into the blue vault above--repelled into outer
space!

We were flying in the cold white light, above a mad blue sea!

In fifteen minutes Sam had brought the machine down upon an ocean that
was still heaving madly from the cataclysm that had drowned a world. He
came into the cabin, and under his skillful ministrations Xenora was
soon sleeping quietly, in a normal slumber from which she would wake
herself again.

Presently Sam questioned me about my adventures. I gave him the whole
account and concluded with the question that, for months, my troubled
mind had striven so vainly to answer.

"Sam, how could intelligence exist in metal?"

"Why not in metal, Mel?" the old scientist replied, smiling
thoughtfully. "Why not there as well as in lumps of impure carbon and
water, as one of the early savants called us? But do you remember the
radioactivity of the metal bar, and the little cells of helium gas in
it? I think the radium had somehow set up neuronic circuits between the
cells, like the circuits between the neurone cells in our brains. It is
not impossible. That was a helium brain--but it was formed as naturally
as yours or mine!"

On May 4, 2000 A.D., just a year after the beginning of my
story, our leisurely homeward cruise was ended. The green coast of
Florida rose out of the clear blue sea before us. Xenora and I stood on
the deck, happy in the cool salty air and the bright sunlight. The girl
was lost in vast delight at the new wonders of azure sea and sapphire
sky. At last the dream of my life was come true!

The wonderful girl of my fancy was by my side, to be mine forever!

But she was the Green Girl no longer! A week of the sun and wind of the
sea had erased the soft green tint of her clear skin, and replaced it
with a light, smooth tan!


                                THE END


        
            